The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery Book, by Liberty Hyde Bailey

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Nursery Book
       A Complete Guide to the Multiplication and Pollination of Plants

Author: Liberty Hyde Bailey

Release Date: January 13, 2015 [EBook #47955]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY BOOK ***




Produced by Tom Cosmas, Cathy Maxam and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







Transcriber Note

  Emphasized text displayed as: _Italic_ and =Bold=.
  Whole and fractional numbers as: 1-1/2




                                  THE

                             NURSERY-BOOK


                           A COMPLETE GUIDE
                                TO THE
               Multiplication and Pollination of Plants


                           _By L. H. BAILEY_


                               New York:
                     The Rural Publishing Company
                                 1891


_By the Same Author._


Horticulturist's Rule-Book.

A Compendium of Useful Information for Fruit Growers, Truck Gardeners,
Florists and others. New edition, completed to the close of 1890. Pp.
250. Library edition, cloth, $1. Pocket edition, paper, 50 cents.


Annals of Horticulture

FOR THE YEARS 1889 AND 1890.

A Witness of Passing Events, and a Record of Progress. Being records
of introductions during the year, of new methods and discoveries in
horticulture, of yields and prices, horticultural literature and work
of the experiment stations, necrology, etc. _Illustrated._ 2 vols.
Library edition, cloth, $1 per vol. Pocket edition, paper, 50 cents per
vol.


COPYRIGHTED 1891,
BY L. H. BAILEY.

ELECTROTYPED AND PRINTED
BY J. HORACE M'FARLAND, HARRISBURG, PA.




PREFACE.


This little handbook aims at nothing more than an account of the
methods commonly employed in the propagation and crossing of plants,
and its province does not extend, therefore, to the discussion of
any of the ultimate results or influences of these methods. All such
questions as those relating to the formation of buds, the reciprocal
influences of cion and stock, comparative advantages of whole and piece
roots, and the results of pollination, do not belong here.

In its preparation I have consulted freely all the best literature
of the subject, and I have been aided by many persons. The entire
volume has been read by skilled propagators, so that even all such
directions as are commonly recommended in other countries have also
been sanctioned, if admitted, as best for this. In the propagation of
trees and shrubs and other hardy ornamentals, I have had the advice of
the head propagator of one of the largest nurseries in this country.
The whole volume has also passed through the hands of B. M. Watson,
Jr., of the Bussey Institution of Harvard University, a teacher of
unusual skill and experience in this direction, and who has added
greatly to the value of the book. The articles upon orchids and upon
most of the different genera of orchids in the Nursery List, have been
contributed by W. J. Bean, of the Royal Gardens, Kew, who is well
known as an orchid specialist. I have drawn freely upon the files of
magazines, both domestic and foreign, and I have made particular use
of Nicholson's Illustrated Dictionary of Gardening, Vilmorin's Les
Fleurs de Pleine Terre, Le Bon Jardinier, and Rümpler's Illustriertes
Gartenbau-Lexikon.

It is believed that the Nursery List contains all the plants which are
ordinarily grown by horticulturists in this country either for food
or ornament. But in order to give some clew to the propagation of any
which are omitted, an ordinal index has been added, by which one can
search out plants of a given natural order or family. It cannot be
hoped that the book is complete, or that the directions are in every
case best for all regions, and any corrections or additions which will
be useful in the preparation of a second edition are solicited.

                                                         L. H. BAILEY.

Ithaca, N. Y., _Jan. 1, 1891_.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

  Seedage                                     9-24
    Regulation of Moisture                       9
    Requirements of Temperature                 14
    Preparatory Treatment of Seeds              15
    Sowing                                      19
    Miscellaneous Matters                       21
    Spores                                      24

CHAPTER II.

  Separation                                 25-31

CHAPTER III.

  Layerage                                   32-38

CHAPTER IV.

  Cuttage      39-62
    Devices for Regulating Heat and Moisture    39
    Soils and General Methods                   46
    Particular Methods--Kinds of Cuttings       51
      1. Tuber Cuttings                         52
      2. Root Cuttings                          53
      3. Stem Cuttings                          54
      4. Leaf Cuttings                          60

CHAPTER V.

  Graftage                                   63-96
    General Considerations                      63
    Particular Methods                          67
      Budding                                   67
      Grafting                                  76
    Grafting Waxes                              92

CHAPTER VI.

  The Nursery List                          97-285

CHAPTER VII.

  Pollination                              286-298
    General Requirements                       287
    Methods                                    291
    Crossing of Flowerless Plants              297

[Illustration]


NURSERY.--_An establishment for the rearing of plants. In America the
word is commonly used in connection with the propagation of woody
plants only, as fruit-trees and ornamental trees and shrubs. This is
erroneous. The word properly includes the propagation of all plants by
whatever means, and in this sense it is used in this book._


Tabular Statement of the Ways in which Plants are Propagated.


  _A._ By Seeds.--_Seedage._

           {              {                { Root-tips.
           {              {                { Runners.
           {              {  1. By         { Layers proper:
           {              {  undetached    {        Simple.
           {              {  parts.--      {        Serpentine.
           {              {  _Layerage._   {        Mound.
           {              {                {        Pot or Chinese.
           {              {
           { I. On their  {                { 1. By undivided parts.--
           { own roots.   {                { _Separation_ (Bulbs, corms,
           {              {                { bulbels, bulblets,
           {              {                { bulb-scales, tubers, etc).
           {              {                {
           {              { 2. By detached {               { Division.
           {              { parts.         { 2. By divided { Cuttings
           {              {                { parts.--      { proper:
           {              {                { _Cuttage._    {    Of tubers.
  _B._     {              {                {               {    Of roots.
  By Buds. {              {                {               {    Of stems.
           {              {                {               {    Of leaves.
           {
           {              {                { I. Budding: Shield, flute,
           {              {                { veneer, ring, annular,
           {              {                { whistle or tubular.
           {              {                {
           {              {                { II. Grafting:
           {              {                {         Whip.
           { II. On roots {                {         Saddle.
           { of other     { 1. By detached {         Splice.
           { plants.--    { scions.        {         Veneer.
           { _Graftage._  {                {         Cleft.
           {              {                {         Bark.
           {              {                {         Herbaceous.
           {              {                {         Seed.
           {              {                {         Double.
           {              {                {         Cutting.
           {              { 2. By undetached scions.--Inarching.




CHAPTER I.

SEEDAGE.

=Seedage.=--The process or operation of propagating by seeds or spores,
or the state or condition of being propagated by seeds or spores.


There are three external requisites to the germination of
seeds--moisture, free oxygen, and a definite temperature. These
requisites are demanded in different degrees and proportions by seeds
of different species, or even by seeds of the same species when
differing widely in age or degree of maturity. The supply of oxygen
usually regulates itself. It is only necessary that the seeds shall not
be planted too deep, that the soil is porous and not overloaded with
water. Moisture and temperature, however, must be carefully regulated.

[Illustration: Fig. 1. Double Seed-Pot.]

=Regulation of Moisture.=--Moisture is the most important factor
in seedage. It is usually applied to the seeds by means of soil or
some similar medium, as moss or cocoanut fiber. Fresh and vigorous
seeds endure heavy waterings, but old and poor seeds must be treated
sparingly. If there is reason to suspect that the seeds are weak,
water should not be applied to them directly. A favorite method of
handling them is to sow them in a pot of loose and sandy loam which
is set inside a larger pot, the intermediate space being filled with
moss, to which, alone, the water is applied. This device is illustrated
in Fig. 1. The water soaks through the walls of the inner pot and is
supplied gradually and constantly to the soil. Even in this case it
is necessary to prevent soaking the moss too thoroughly, especially
with very weak seeds. When many pots are required, they may be simply
plunged in moss with the same effect. The soil should be simply very
slightly moist, never wet. Moisture is sometimes supplied by setting
the seed-pot in a shallow saucer of water, or it may be sufficient to
simply place it in the humid atmosphere of a propagating-box. Large
seeds may be laid upon the surface of the soil in a half-filled pot,
covered with thin muslin, and then covered with loose and damp loam.
Every day the pot is inverted, the covering taken off and fresh soil
is added. A modification of this plan for small seeds can be made by
placing the seeds between two layers of thin muslin and inserting them
in damp loam, which is frequently renewed to avoid the extremes which
would result from watering or from allowing the soil to become dry.
In these last operations, no water is applied to the seeds and they
constitute one of the most satisfactory methods of dealing with seeds
of low vitality. They are essentially the methods long ago used by
Knight, who laid such seeds between two sods cut from an old and dry
pasture.

Even sound and strong seeds should be watered with care. Drenchings
usually weaken or destroy them. The earth should be kept simply damp.
To insure comparative dryness in in-door culture, some loose material,
as pieces of broken pots or clinkers, should be placed in the bottom of
the pot or box to afford drainage. It should be borne in mind, however,
that the seed bed should be approximately equally moist throughout its
depth. The waterings should therefore be copious enough to moisten the
soil throughout. A wet or moist surface over a dry substratum should
always be avoided. Error is common here. It is usually best to apply
water with a watering-pot, as watering with a hose is apt to wash out
the seeds and to pack the soil, and the quantity of water is not so
easily regulated.

At first thought, it would appear that the apparently good results
following soaking of seeds in many cases, are a contradiction of these
statements that seeds may be over-watered. But soaking is usually
beneficial only when practiced for a comparatively short time. It is
not good practice to soak delicate seeds before sowing, and it is of
doubtful utility in most other cases, unless it is necessary to soften
the integuments of hard-shelled species, as discussed on page 17. The
gain in rapidity of germination following soaked, as compared with dry
seeds, is really fictitious, inasmuch as germination actually begins in
the soaked seeds before the dry samples are sown. The soaked seeds are
sown in water rather than in soil, and as conditions are more uniform
there, a gain apparently due to soaking may result. In the case of
strong seeds which must be planted out-doors in cold or uncongenial
soil, a preliminary soaking of from 12 to 24 hours may be beneficial,
as it lessens the period which the seeds would otherwise pass in
untoward conditions. But soaked seeds, unless of very hardy species,
should never be sown out-doors until the soil has become rather dry and
warm.

To prevent too rapid drying out, the soil should be firmly pressed
about the seeds. The pot or box should be given a shady place, or some
covering may be applied to check evaporation. A pane of glass is often
placed over the box, being tilted a little at intervals to allow of
ventilation and to prevent the soil from becoming soggy or "sour." A
seed-case, with a glass cover, as shown in Fig. 2, is neat and handy in
the treatment of small seeds. A thin covering of fine moss is sometimes
given, or a newspaper may be thrown over the soil.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Seed-Case.]

In out-door culture, only a naturally dry and well-drained soil should
be chosen for all ordinary seeds, especially for such as are sown
in the fall or remain in the ground a long time before germinating.
Soils which contain a liberal amount of sand or gravel are especially
valuable for this purpose.

To prevent drying in out-door culture, it is important that the earth
be well firmed over the seeds. Walking on the row, placing one foot
directly ahead of the other, is usually the most expeditious and
satisfactory operation, at least with large seeds. Or the earth may
be firmed with a hoe or the back of a spade, or a board may be placed
upon the row and then be thoroughly settled by walking over it. In
the sowing of celery and other small and slow seeds, it is a frequent
practice to leave the board on the row until the seeds appear in order
to hold the moisture. This is a doubtful expedient, however, for the
young plants are apt to be quickly dispatched by the sun when the board
is removed. If the board is employed, it should be raised an inch or
two from the ground as soon as the plants begin to appear. But the
shade of the board is too dense and plants do not grow stocky under it.
It is better to use brush or lath screens if protection is desired;
or fine litter, if free from weed seeds, may be used. In most cases,
however, screens will not be needed by celery and similar seeds if the
ground is in the proper condition and is well firmed at planting time.
It is always advisable, nevertheless, to place the beds for slow and
small seeds where they can be watered occasionally.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. Lath Screen.]

There are many kinds of screens in use to prevent the drying out of
small seeds in out-door seedage and to protect the young seedlings.
These are used also in the shading of cuttings. The common lath screen
(Fig. 3) is the most useful for general purposes. It is simply a square
frame made from common laths laid at right angles in a double series.
The interstices between the laths are equal in width to the laths
themselves. These screens are laid horizontally upon a light frame-work
a few inches above the seeds. The passage of the sun constantly moves
the shadows over the bed, and sufficient shade is afforded while
thorough ventilation is allowed. This and all other elevated screens
are useful in shading and protecting the young plants as well, but when
used for this purpose they are usually raised a greater distance above
the beds. A brush screen consisting of a low frame covered with boughs,
is often used, as shown in Fig. 4. This is cheaper than the lath
screens, and is equally as good for most purposes. The brush is often
laid directly upon the ground, especially in large beds. This answers
the purpose of shading, but it does not allow of weeding and it must
be taken off soon after the seeds germinate, or slender plants will be
injured in its removal. Brush screens are sometimes raised three or
four feet to allow of weeding. A screen for frames is shown in Fig.
5. It is a simple covering of muslin stretched over the top and sides
of a rough frame-work. The cloth is usually omitted from the front
side. This style of screens is much used by nurserymen, especially for
cutting beds. Whitewashing the sashes also affords good shading. A more
elaborate and permanent screen is shown in Fig. 6. It is built of
slats, usually 3-inch stuff. This shed screen is oftenest used for the
protection of tender plants, but it affords an exceedingly useful and
convenient place for the storage of pots and boxes of slow-germinating
seeds.

[Illustration: Fig. 4. Brush Screen.]

[Illustration: Fig. 5. Screen for Frames.]

[Illustration: Fig. 6. Shed Screen.]

Various frames and covers are employed for in-door seedage, but
they are designed to regulate atmospheric moisture and to control
temperature. They are more commonly employed in the growing of
cuttings, and are therefore described in Chapter IV.

=Requirements of Temperature.=--Variations in temperature exercise less
influence upon seeds than variations in moisture. Yet it is important
that the extremes of temperature should not be great, especially in
small, delicate or weak seeds. Seeds will endure greater extremes of
temperature when dry than when moist. This indicates that germinating
seeds must be kept in a comparatively uniform temperature. For this
reason it is poor practice to place seed-boxes in a window in full
sunlight. Partial or complete shade serves the double purpose of
preventing too great heat and too rapid evaporation. Various covered
seed-boxes are used for the purpose of maintaining approximately the
required temperature, but as they are oftener used in bud-propagation,
they are discussed in that connection.

Bottom heat is helpful to germination in most seeds, but, except in
the case of certain tropical species, it should not be strong. It is a
common practice to place the seed-boxes on moderately cool pipes under
benches in a greenhouse. Seeds of hardy annuals and perennials do not
require bottom heat, although they may be benefitted by it. If the
soil in seed beds should become too cool, watering with warm or tepid
water will be found helpful.

It is impossible to give rules for the determination of the proper
temperature for different kinds of seeds. In general, it may be said
that seeds germinate most rapidly at a temperature a few degrees above
that required for the best development of the plant itself. Hardy
plants require a temperature of from 50° to 70°, conservatory plants
from 60° to 75° or 80°, and tropical or stove plants from 75° to 95°.
The plantlets should be removed from these highest temperatures, as a
rule, as soon as germination is completed.

In out-door culture, depth of planting has a direct relation to
temperature. Seeds may be planted deeper late in the season than early,
when the soil is cold and damp. Deep planting probably as often kills
seeds because of the absence of sufficient heat as from the lack of
oxygen or the great depth of earth through which the plantlet is unable
to push.

=Preparatory Treatment of Seeds.=--Many seeds demand some treatment
preparatory to sowing. Nearly all hard and bony seeds fail to
germinate, or at least germinate very irregularly, if their contents
are allowed to become thoroughly dry and hard. The shells must also be
softened or broken in many cases before the embryo can grow. Nature
treats such seeds by keeping them constantly moist under leaves or
mold, and by cracking them with frost. This suggests the practice
known to gardeners as _stratification_, an operation which consists in
mixing seeds with earth and exposing them to frost or to moisture for a
considerable time.

Stratification is practiced, as a rule, with all nuts, the seeds of
forest trees, shrubs, the pips of haws and often of roses, and in
many cases with the seeds of common fruits. It should be performed as
soon as possible after the seeds are mature. Small seeds are usually
placed in thin layers in a box alternating with an inch or two of sand.
Sometimes the seeds are mixed indiscriminately in the sand, but unless
they are large it is difficult to separate them out at sowing time.
The sand is often sown with the seeds, however, but it is difficult
in such cases to distribute the seeds evenly, and in sowing large
quantities the handling of the sand entails a considerable burden and
becomes an item of expense. It is advisable to pass the sand through a
sieve of finer mesh than the seeds, and the seeds can then be sifted
out at sowing time. If the seeds are very small or very few in number
they may be placed between folds of thin muslin, which is then laid
in the sand. Any shallow box, like a gardener's "flat," is useful in
making stratifications, or with small lots of seeds pots may be used.
A flat four inches deep might contain two or three layers or strata of
seeds the size of peas.

The disposition of the boxes when filled varies with different
operators. Some prefer to bury them. In this case a well-drained sandy
slope is chosen. The flats are placed in a trench from one to two feet
deep, covered with a single thickness of boards, and the trench is
then filled with earth. The seeds usually freeze somewhat, although
freezing is not considered necessary unless in the case of nut-like
seeds. The object attained in burying is to keep the seeds moist and
fresh, inducing the rotting or softening of the coverings, while they
are buried so deep that they will not sprout. Seeds of most forest
trees should be treated in this manner. They are commonly left in the
ground until the second spring, when they are taken up and sown in
drills in mellow ground. If good loam to which has been added a little
well-rotted manure is used, the seeds or nuts of hardy trees and shrubs
may be allowed to germinate and grow for one season in the flats. At
the end of the season or the next spring the plants can be transplanted
without losing one. This is, perhaps, the best way to handle rare and
difficult subjects.

Many growers place the boxes on the surface in some protected place, as
under trees or in a shed, and cover them a foot deep with clean straw
or leaves. This is a good method for all seeds which are to be sown the
following spring, as those of many fruits. If boxes are piled on top
each other they should be mulched with moss, else the under ones may
become too dry. Or the boxes may be placed without covering in a shed,
but they must be examined occasionally to see that they do not become
too dry. Precaution must also be taken to keep away mice, squirrels,
blue-jays and other intruders.

Large nut-like seeds or fruits, like peach-pits, walnuts and
hickory-nuts, are usually buried in sand or light loam where they will
freeze. Or sometimes the large nuts are thrown into a pile with earth
and allowed to remain on the surface. Freezing serves a useful purpose
in aiding to crack the shells, but it is not essential to subsequent
germination, as is commonly supposed. All seeds, so far as known, can
be grown without the agency of frost if properly handled.

Fall sowing amounts to stratification, but unless the soil is mellow
and very thoroughly drained the practice is not advisable. The seeds
are liable to be heaved or washed out, eaten by vermin, and the soil is
apt to bake over them. Under proper conditions, however, the seeds of
fruits and many forest trees thrive well under fall sowing. The seeds
should be sown as soon as they are ripe, even if in mid-summer; or if
the ground is not ready for them at that time, they may be temporarily
stratified to prevent too great hardening of the parts. It is best,
however, to allow all green or moist seeds to dry off a few days before
they are stratified. Fall sown seeds should always be mulched.

Some seeds rarely germinate until the second year after maturity,
even with the best of treatment. The thorns, mountain ash, hollies,
viburnums, some roses, and many others belong to this category. Some
growers sow them regularly as soon as they are ripe and allow the beds
to remain until the seeds appear. This is a waste of land and of labor
in weeding, and the best way is to stratify them and allow them to
remain until the second spring before sowing.

Partial substitutes for stratification are soaking and scalding the
seeds. Soaking may be advantageously practiced in the case of slow and
hard seeds, which are not enclosed in bony shells, and which have been
allowed to become dry. Seeds of apple, locust and others of similar
character, are sometimes treated in this manner. They are soaked for 24
or 36 hours, and it is commonly supposed that if they are exposed to a
sharp frost in the meantime, better results will follow. While still
wet the seeds are sown. Scalding water may be poured over locust and
other seeds to soften their covering. But seeds should not be boiled,
as sometimes recommended.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. Bored Seed.]

The germination of bony seeds is often facilitated by filing or cutting
away the shell very carefully near the germ, or by boring them. A bored
nelumbium seed is shown in Fig. 7.

Treatment with various chemicals has been recommended for the purpose
of softening integuments, and also for some power which strong
oxidizing agents are supposed to exert in hastening germination
itself, but the advantages are mostly imaginary. Secret and patented
"germinator" compounds had better be avoided.

Pulpy and fleshy coverings should be removed from seeds before sowing.
Soft fruits, like berries, are broken up or ground into a pulp and
the seeds are then washed out. This separation may be performed
immediately in some cases, but when the pulp adheres to the seed,
the whole mass is usually allowed to stand until fermentation and
partial decay has liberated the seeds. The pulp will then rise, in
most instances, leaving the seeds at the bottom of the vessel. Seeds
can be liberated quickly by adding a stick of caustic potash to each
pail of water. After the mass has stood an hour or so, the seeds can
be rubbed out easily. Even tomato seeds can be cleaned with safety in
this manner. Seeds which have thin coverings, as the viburnums and many
haws, can be prepared by rubbing them through the hands with sharp
sand. Or the scant pulp of such seeds may be allowed to rot off in the
stratification box. Fleshy coverings of hard and bony seeds may be
removed by maceration. Allow them to stand in water at a temperature
of about 75° for one to three weeks, and then wash them out. Resinous
coverings are sometimes removed by mixing the seeds with fresh ashes or
lime, or by treating them with lye. Hard, thick-walled seeds are rarely
injured by the decay of the pulpy covering, but thin-walled seeds
should be cleaned, to avoid the possibility of damaging them.[A]

[A] An admirable paper upon the propagation of hardy trees and shrubs
from seeds and the treatment of the young seedlings, by Jackson Dawson,
may be found in Trans. Mass. Hort. Soc. 1885, part 1, 145, and also in
Rep. Sec. Mass. Bd. Agr. 1885, 468.

=Sowing.=--The soil in which seeds are sown, especially in in-door
culture, should be such as to allow of perfect drainage and at the same
time to hold moisture. Good potting soil, with a liberal allowance of
sharp sand, is the best for general purposes. Pure sand becomes too
dense, and leaf mold alone is usually too loose and open. A proper
combination of the two corrects both faults. It is impossible to
describe a good potting or seed-bed soil. Some experience is essential
to the best results in preparing it. It should be of such character
that when a damp portion is firmly compressed in the hand it will fall
apart when released. It should never bake. Good old garden loam, to
which an equal quantity of sand has been added, is usually a good soil
for common in-door seedage. There should be no manure in soil used for
seeds which produce a delicate growth, as rhododendrons and kalmias. In
all such cases, rotted sod or leafy peat forms the best basis. The soil
should be sifted and thoroughly fined before seeds are put into it.
Seeds usually require lighter soil than that in which the growing plant
will flourish. Cocoanut fiber is sometimes used in place of the soil,
as it holds moisture, allows of almost perfect drainage, and does not
become "sour." Fine dead sphagnum moss may also be used. Orchid seeds
are usually sown on the live moss in which the parent plant is growing;
or they may be sown on damp wood or cork. (See under Orchids, Chap.
VI.) Small seeds, like those of cineraria and calceolaria, germinate
well in very old cow-dung obtained from a pasture; the unctuous
matters have disappeared, leaving a fibrous remainder. But all things
considered, well-prepared soil is the most satisfactory medium which
can be used. Seeds of aquatic plants which are to be sown in a pond may
be placed in a ball of clay and dropped into the water.

Shallow boxes or "flats" and earthen seed-pans and lily-pans are
usually preferable to pots in which to grow seeds. They give more
surface in proportion to their contents and require less attention in
drainage. If pots are used, the four to six inch sizes are best.

If delicate seeds are sown out-doors, they should be given some
protection, if possible. An ordinary hot-bed frame gives the best
results. In warm weather or a sunny exposure it will be found desirable
to substitute a cloth screen for the sash. A thin or medium water-proof
plant cloth, either commercial or home-made, is excellent for this
purpose. It may be tacked upon a simple and light rectangular frame
which is strengthened at the corners by iron "carriage-corners." These
cloth-covered frames are handy for many purposes, particularly for
protecting and supplying some warmth to seed-pans and young seedlings.

It is essential that good drainage be given all in-door seed-pots or
seed-beds. A layer of broken pots or other coarse material is placed on
the bottom. Many growers place a thin layer of fine dead sphagnum moss
or of peat over this drainage material, and it certainly makes a useful
addition. It is particularly useful in isolated pots or small boxes,
as it holds enough moisture to prevent too rapid drying out, while all
surplus water is quickly taken off by the coarse material beneath. Over
the moss coarse siftings from the soil may be placed, while on top only
the finest and best soil should be used. The smaller the seeds, the
more care must be exercised in the sowing.

The proper depth for sowing varies directly with the size of the seed.
The chief advantage of very fine soil for small seeds is the greater
exactness of depth of covering which it allows. Very small seeds should
be sown upon the surface, which has previously been well firmed and
levelled, and then covered with a very thin layer of finely sifted soil
or a little old and dead moss rubbed through a sieve. This covering
should be scarcely deeper than the thickness of the seeds; that is, the
seeds should be barely covered. Many prefer pressing the seeds into the
soil with a block. Or if one has a close propagating-box, the seeds
may remain upon the surface and sufficient moisture will be supplied
from the atmosphere. Such fine seeds are rarely watered directly, as
even the most careful treatment would be likely to dislodge them. The
soil is usually well watered before the seeds are sown, or moisture may
be supplied by inserting the pot in water nearly to its rim for a few
moments. If water is applied from a hose, a thin cloth should first
be spread on the soil to hold it. Celery seeds, in out-door beds, are
often sown upon a nicely prepared surface and are then pressed in by
means of the feet or a board. Some cover to prevent evaporation should
be given all small seeds. This may be a board or a slate slab at first,
but as soon as the plants appear glass should be substituted to admit
light. (See pp. 11 to 14.)

Large seeds demand much less care as to depth of covering, as a rule.
One-fourth or one-half inch is a good depth for most coarse seeds
in-doors. If one wishes to gauge the depth accurately, the drills
may be made by a planting stick, like that shown in Fig. 8. Its
flange is made of the required thickness, and it is pressed into the
soil until the cap strikes the surface. This is a useful implement
in seed testing. Another device for regulating the depth of sowing,
particularly in seed testing, is the Tracy planter, shown in Fig. 9.
It consists of two strips of heavy tin plate about three inches wide,
hung upon two wire pivots or hinges some two inches long. At their
upper edges and equidistant from either end, the plates are joined by
a firm spiral spring, which serves to throw the upper edges apart, and
to cause the lower edges to join. This trough is now filled with the
required number of seeds, and is then inserted into the earth to a
given depth, when the fingers push inward on the spring and the trough
opens and delivers the seeds.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Planting Stick.]

=Miscellaneous Matters.=--The influence which light exerts upon
germination is not definitely understood. It is known, however, that
seeds will often germinate in full sunlight, if the proper conditions
of moisture and temperature can be maintained. Seeds sown upon a
moist surface and covered with a glass present an interesting study.
But it is well known, on the other hand, that some seeds will not
germinate, or will at least appear unevenly, if subjected to sunlight.
At least some of the delphiniums, papavers and adonises germinate very
imperfectly, if at all, in direct light. It is always advisable to keep
germinating seeds in shade or partial darkness, especially as there is
nothing to be gained by exposing them. Of course the soil itself is
sufficient protection if the seeds are covered.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. Tracy Planter.]

It is a common statement that seeds can never revive if allowed to
become thoroughly dry after they have begun to sprout. This is an
error. Wheat, oats, buckwheat, maize, pea, onion, radish and other
seeds have been experimented upon in this direction, and they are found
to re-germinate readily, even if allowed to become thoroughly dry and
brittle after sprouting is well progressed. They will even re-germinate
several times. Wheat, peas and other seeds have been carried through so
many as seven germinations after the radicle had grown a half inch or
more and the seeds had been sufficiently dried in each trial to render
them fit for grinding.

Damping-off is a common ailment of young seedlings and cuttings. The
stem becomes brown and constricted at or near the surface of the
soil, and it soon rots and falls over. The top of the plant often
remains alive and fresh for several days after it has fallen. A
fungus is supposed to cause damping-off. The conditions which seem to
particularly favor the development of this fungus are a moist and close
atmosphere, crowding and careless watering. Plants are particularly
liable to damp-off if only sufficient water is applied to keep the
surface moist while the under soil remains dry. Hot sand, sifted over
the plants, will check it, but there is no complete remedy. Attention
to the above suggestions will serve as a preventive.

The transportation of certain kinds of seeds over long distances,
especially on sea voyages, is often beset with difficulties.
Thick-meated or soft seeds may become too dry if stored in a warm
place or too moist if stored in a cool one. The humid atmosphere of
the ocean is fatal to some seeds unless they are well protected, and
the moist and hot climates of some tropical countries destroy many
seeds of cooler regions before they can be planted. Thin-coated seeds
demand dryness and air, and bony seeds usually need moisture and a
more confined atmosphere. Most seeds may be sent dry and loose in
coarse paper packages under all ordinary circumstances; but if they
are to traverse very hot and moist climates, they should be sealed in
tin cases or very securely wrapped in oiled paper, in which case the
seeds should be thoroughly dried before being packed. Small seeds which
are liable to become moldy may be packed in finely powdered charcoal.
Apple and pear seeds are often imported in this manner. The seeds or
fruits of woody plants require more careful management. They should
generally be transported in some sort of stratification. A favorite
method is to place them in boxes or jars, mixed with naturally moist
sand or sawdust, or slightly moist dead sphagnum moss. Some prefer to
seal the packages hermetically, but under ordinary conditions this is
unnecessary. In transit, the packages should be stored in a medium
and uniform temperature. Even acorns, which are often difficult to
transport over long voyages, may be carried in this manner with safety.
It is important that the soil should not be wet. Natural soil from a
dryish and loamy pasture is excellent. In some cases it is better to
sprout the seeds in the native country and ship the seedlings in a
closed or Wardian case.

It should be borne in mind that actual plantings rarely give so good
results as seed tests, from the fact that conditions are more variable.
There is often a variation of over fifty per cent. even when the
planting has been carefully done. This is proof that liberal seeding
should always be practiced.

=Spores.=--Ferns, lycopodiums and selaginellas are often grown from
spores. The general conditions adapted to the germination of seeds are
also suitable for the germination of spores, but extra care must be
taken with the drainage. If a pot is used, it should be half or more
filled with drainage material, and the soil should be rendered loose
by the addition of bits of brick, charcoal, cinders or other porous
materials. The surface soil should be fine and uniform. Some place a
thin layer of brick dust upon the surface, in which the spores are
sown. It is a frequent practice to bake the soil to destroy other
spores which might cause troublesome growths. The spores should be
sprinkled upon the surface and should not be covered. The pot should be
set in a saucer of water and it should be covered by paper or a pane
of glass if the sun strikes it. Better results are obtained if the pot
or pan is placed inside a propagating-frame or under a bell-glass. In
place of earth, a block or small cubes of firm peat or sandstone may
be employed. The block is placed in a saucer of water and the spores
are sown upon its surface. Water should not be applied directly to the
spores, as it is apt to dislodge them.

The period of germination varies in different species, but three to six
weeks may be considered the ordinary limits. While still very small,
the plantlets should be pricked out, and for some time thereafter they
should be subjected to the same conditions as before. Spores are so
exceedingly small and light that the greatest care must be exercised in
growing them. In order to gather them, the fronds may be cut as soon as
the sori or fruit-dots turn brown, and stored in close boxes or paper
bags.

Note.--For tables of weights and longevities of seeds and quantities
required for given areas, consult Horticulturist's Rule-Book.




CHAPTER II.

SEPARATION.

=Separation.=--The act or process of multiplying plants by means of
naturally detached asexual organs, or the state or condition of being
so multiplied.


Separation is effected by means of bulbs, bulbels, bulb-scales,
bulblets, corms, tubers, offsets, crowns and sometimes by buds.

Bulbs of all kinds are specialized buds. They are made up of a short
and rudimentary axis closely encased in transformed and thickened
leaves or bulb-scales. These thickened parts are stored with nutriment
which is used during subsequent growth. Bulbs occur only in plants
which are accustomed to a long period of inactivity. Many bulbous
plants are peculiar to dry and arid regions, where growth is impossible
during long periods. A bulb is, therefore, a more or less permanent and
compact leaf-bud, usually occupying the base of the stem underground
and emitting roots from its lower portion. Bulbs are conveniently
divided into two great classes--the scaly, or those composed of narrow
and mostly loose scales, as in the lily, and laminate or tunicate, or
those composed of more or less continuous and close-fitting layers or
plates, as in the onion.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. Bulb of Lilium candidum.]

Bulbs often break up or divide themselves into two or more nearly equal
portions, as in _Lilium candidum_, shown one-third natural size in
Fig. 10. The parts may be separated and treated as complete bulbs for
purposes of propagation. This division or separation of bulbs proceeds
in a different manner in nearly every species, yet it is so obvious
that the novice need not be perplexed by it. Almost any breaking apart
of these loose bulbs, if only a "heart" or central axis remains in each
portion, is successful for purposes of slow multiplication; but when
flowers are desired it is usually inadvisable.

Bulbous plants multiply most easily by means of _bulbels_--often also
called bulbules and offsets--or small bulbs which are borne about a
large or mother bulb. In some lilies, as _Lilium candidum_, the bulbels
form at the top or crown of the mother bulb, and a circle of roots
will be found between them and the bulb; in others, as _L. speciosum_
and _L. auratum_, they form on the lower part of the flower stalk.
In some species the bulbels are few and very large, or even single,
and they bloom the following year. In such cases the bulb undergoes a
progressive movement from year to year after the manner of root-stocks,
the bulb of one year forming a more or less distinct one above and
beyond it which continues the species, while the old one becomes weak
or dies. This method of bulb formation is seen in the cut of _Lilium
pardalinum_, Fig. 11. In the hyacinth the bulbels form at the base of
the bulb.

[Illustration: Fig. 11. Bulb of Lilium pardalinum.]

Bulbels vary greatly in size and frequency in different species.
Sometimes they are no larger than a grain of wheat, and in other plants
they are as large as hickory-nuts. In some species they are borne
habitually underneath the scales of the mother bulb. These bulbels
are often removed when the mother bulbs are taken up, and they are
usually planted in essentially the same manner as the bulbs themselves,
although it is desirable to place them, at least for the first year,
in a bed or border by themselves. Or if they are especially small and
delicate they may be planted in pots or flats and be treated about the
same as single eye cuttings. In some lilies the bulbels are allowed
to remain attached and the whole mass is planted in the fall in close
drills. Sometimes the larger lily bulbels will produce flowers the
following season, but they usually require the whole of the season in
which to complete their growth. The second fall they are ready to be
permanently planted. Bulbels of some plants require a longer time in
which to mature into bulbs.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. Cut Hyacinth Bulb.]

[Illustration: Fig. 13. Hollowed Hyacinth Bulb.]

Bulbels are often produced by an injury to the bulb. Growth of stem
and leaves is prevented or checked and the energy is directed to the
formation of minute buds, or bulbs, in the same manner as adventitious
buds form upon a wounded stem. Advantage is taken of this fact to
multiply some bulbous plants, and in the case of the hyacinths, at
least, the mutilation of bulbs for this purpose is practiced to a
commercial extent. Hyacinth bulbs are cut in two, or are slashed
in various ways. The favorite method is to make two or three deep
transverse cuts into the base of the bulb. The strongest bulbs should
be chosen and the operation is performed in spring or early summer
when the bulb is taken up. The bulbs are sometimes hollowed out from
the under side for half or more of their length. This operation is
sometimes performed later in the season than the other, and precaution
should be exercised that the bulbs do not become too moist, else they
will rot. Hollowed bulbs should be well dried before being planted.
Both methods of preparing hyacinth bulbs are shown in Figs. 12 and 13
which are adapted from Gardeners' Chronicle. Fig. 14 shows a portion
of the base of a cross-cut bulb, with the adventitious bulbels. The
mutilated bulbs are stored during summer, and are planted in fall or
spring. The wounded bulbs produce very little foliage, but at the end
of the first season the bulbels will have formed. The bulbels are then
separated and planted by themselves in prepared beds. Several years
are required for the bulbels to mature into flowering bulbs. Some of
the strongest ones may produce flowering bulbs in three years, but
some of them, especially those obtained from the hollowed bulbs, will
not mature short of six years. This method of propagating hyacinths is
confined almost entirely to Holland.

[Illustration: Fig. 14. Cross-Cut Bulb.]

The scales of bulbs are often employed to multiply scarce varieties.
From ten to thirty of the thicker scales may be removed from the
outside of the bulb without serious injury to it. These are treated
in the same manner as single eye cuttings. They are usually handled
in flats or propagating-frames, and are pressed perpendicularly into
a light and loose soil--half sharp sand and half leaf-mould--for
nearly or quite their entire length, or are scattered in damp moss.
Keep the soil simply moist, and for hardy and half-hardy species keep
the temperature rather low--from 45° to 60°. Slight bottom heat may
sometimes be given to advantage. In from three to ten weeks a little
bulbel, or sometimes two or more, will appear at the base of the scale,
as shown in Fig. 15.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. Bulb-Scale.]

These pots or flats may be plunged out-doors during summer if the
planting was done in winter, or the scales may be potted off or
transferred to the open border as soon as rootlets have formed. It is
the common practice with most hardy species to allow the scales to
remain in the original flats during summer and to cover them the next
fall, allowing them to remain out-doors over winter. The succeeding
spring they are shifted into a bed or border, and by the next
fall--having had two summers' growth--most species will be ready for
permanent planting in the flower border.

A _bulblet_ is a small bulb borne entirely above ground, usually in the
axil of a leaf or in the inflorescence. Familiar examples occur in the
tiger lily and in "top" onions. In the former instance the bulblets are
direct transformations of buds, while in the onion they are transformed
flowers. It is impossible to draw any line of separation between
bulblets and buds. In some plants, certain buds detach themselves
and fall to the ground to multiply the species. Sometimes these buds
vegetate before they fall from the plants, as in the case of various
ferns. For purposes of propagation, bulblets are treated in the same
way as bulbels, and like them, they reproduce the variety upon which
they grow. They will develop into full grown bulbs in from one to three
years, according to the species.

[Illustration: Fig. 16. Gladiolus Corm.]

A _corm_ is a bulb-like organ which is solid throughout. Familiar
examples occur in the gladiolus and crocus. Cormous plants are
multiplied in essentially the same manner as bulbous species. As a
rule, a new corm is produced each year above the old one, and this
commonly bears flowers the following season. This renewal is well
shown in the gladiolus, Fig. 16. The illustration shows a gladiolus
bottom, half size, when taken up in November. At the base are seen the
withered remains of the corm which was planted in the spring, and above
it the new corm which will furnish bloom the following season. A number
of _cormels_ or "spawn" have also appeared. These may be planted out in
a border or bed and will produce mature bulbs in one or two seasons.
The larger ones, under good treatment, will often produce bulbs an inch
in diameter the first season. Some growers keep the cormels a year and
a half before planting them out, as they are thought to vegetate more
evenly under such treatment; in this case they should be placed in sand
to prevent too great drying out.

Adventitious cormels may be produced by various methods of wounding the
mother corm, and this practice of exciting them is often necessary,
as some varieties do not produce cormels freely. Each bud on the top
or side of the corm may be made to produce a separate corm by cutting
a deep ring around it, so as to partly divide it. Or the corm may be
directly cut into as many separate pieces as there are buds or eyes,
after the manner of cutting potatoes, but these pieces are usually
handled in flats where temperature and moisture can be controlled.
Almost any injury to such vigorous corms as those of the gladiolus and
crocus will result in the production of cormels, if care is taken that
the corms do not become so cold and wet that they will rot.

A _tuber_ is a prominently thickened portion of a root or stem, and it
is usually subterranean. The potato, sweet potato and dahlia furnish
good examples. Tuberiferous plants are multiplied by planting these
tubers whole, or the tubers may be cut into small portions as described
in Chapter IV, in the descriptions of cuttings. In hardy species, the
tubers may be allowed to remain in the ground during winter, but they
are generally dug in the fall and stored in a dry and cold place, but
where they will not freeze.

An _offset_ is a crown or rosette of leaves, usually borne next the
surface of the ground, which detaches itself and forms an independent
plant. The best examples occur in the house-leeks, plants which are
more familiarly known as "hen and chickens" and "man and wife." These
offsets take root readily, and in propagating there is no other care
necessary than to remove and plant them.

A _crown_ is a detachable portion of a root-stock bearing roots and
a prominent bud. Rhizomes or root-stocks multiply individuals and
extend the distribution of the species by means of a progressive
movement of the crowns. The root-stock grows during summer, and at the
end of the season each branch develops a strong terminal bud which
usually produces a flowering stem the following season. The root-stock
gradually dies away at its old extremity, and in a few years a single
individual gives rise to a considerable patch. This is well shown by
the common May-Apple or podophyllum.

[Illustration: Fig. 17. Lily of the Valley Crown.]

In some species these crowns are removed in the autumn and are planted
and handled in much the same manner as bulbs. The crown or pip of the
lily of the valley, shown half size in Fig. 17, is obtained in this
manner.




CHAPTER III.

LAYERAGE.

  =Layerage.=--The operation or practice of making a layer, or the
  state or condition of being layered.

  =Layer.=--A shoot or root, attached to the parent plant, partially or
  wholly covered with earth with the intention that it shall take root
  and then be severed from the parent.

  =Stolon.=--A decumbent shoot which, without the aid of man, takes
  root and forms an independent plant.


Many plants habitually propagate by means of decumbent shoots and
runners. These shoots become more or less covered with earth or leaves,
and roots are emitted, usually at the joints. In many cases, the old
shoots die away and an entirely independent plant arises from each mass
of roots. In other plants, the shoots remain attached to the parent,
at least for a number of years, so that the plant comprises a colony
of essentially distinct individuals. Great numbers of plants which
do not propagate naturally by means of layers are readily increased
by this means under the direction of the grower. In most cases it is
only necessary to lay down the branches, cover them with earth, and
allow them to remain until roots are well formed, when they can be
severed from the parent. Layering is one of the simplest methods of
propagation, as the mother plants nurse the layer plants until they
can sustain themselves. It is a ready means of multiplying hard-wooded
plants which do not grow well from cuttings.

All vines, and all plants which have runners or long and slender shoots
which fall to the ground, may be multiplied readily by layerage. Among
fruits, the black-cap raspberry is a familiar example. The canes of
the current year bend over late in summer and the tips strike the
earth. If the tip is secured by a slight covering of earth, or if it
finds lodgment in a mellow soil, roots are emitted and in the fall a
strong bud or "crown" or "eye" is formed for next year's growth. The
parent cane is severed in the fall or spring, some four or six inches
above the ground, and an independent plant, known as a "root-tip," as
shown in Fig. 18, is obtained. In this instance, as in most others,
it is immaterial at what point the parent stem is severed, except
that a short portion of it serves as a handle in carrying the plant,
and also marks the position of the plant when it is set. The black
raspberry propagates itself naturally by means of layers, and it
is only necessary, in most cases, to bring the soil into a mellow
condition when the tips begin to touch the ground in order that they
may find anchorage. This layering by inserting the growing point has
the advantage of producing very strong "crowns" or plants in autumn
from shoots or canes of the same year, and it should be more generally
practised. Even currants, gooseberries, and many other plants can be
handled in this way.

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Raspberry tip.]

[Illustration: Fig. 19. Covered Layer of Viburnum.]

In most cases of layerage it is necessary to lay down the branches
and to cover them. The covering may be continuous, as in Fig. 19, or
it may be applied only to the joints or restricted portions of the
shoot, as illustrated in Fig. 20. In either case, the covering should
be shallow, not exceeding one to three inches. If the shoot is stiff a
stone or sod may be placed upon it to hold it down; or a crotched stick
may be thrust down over it, as in the "pegging down" of propagators.

[Illustration: Fig. 20. Layered Shoots.]

The strongest plants are usually obtained by securing only one plant
from a shoot, and for this purpose the earth should be applied only
at one point, preferably over a bud somewhere near the middle of the
shoot. If the buds are close together, all but the strongest one may
be cut out. If more plants are desired, however, _serpentine layering_
may be practiced, as shown at A in Fig. 20. The shoot is bent in an
undulating fashion, and from every covered portion roots will form and
a plant may be obtained. The covered layer also possesses the advantage
of giving more than one plant, but the roots are apt to form so
continuously that definite and strong plants are rarely obtained; these
rooted portions may be treated as cuttings, however, with good results.
The grape is sometimes propagated by serpentine layering.

Stiff and hard-wooded plants do not often "strike" or root readily, and
in order to facilitate rooting the branch is wounded at the point where
a new plant is desired. This wounding serves to induce formation of
adventitious buds at that point, and to check the growth of the branch
at the tip. It is a common practice to cut the branch about half in two
obliquely, on the lower side. This operation is known as "tongueing."
"Ringing" or girdling, twisting, notching, and various other methods
are employed, none of which, perhaps, possess any peculiar advantages
in general practice. Some propagators cut all the buds from the covered
portion. In this case the free and protruding end of the layer is
expected to form the top of the new plant. "Arching," or very abrupt
bending, as in serpentine layering, serves the same purpose and is the
only attention necessary in most vines.

When large numbers of plants are desired, as in commercial nurseries,
it is often necessary to cut back the parent plant to the ground,
or very nearly so, for the purpose of securing many shoots fit for
layering. A plant which is cut back in the spring will produce shoots
fit for layering the following spring; or some species will produce
them in abundance the same year if layers of green or immature wood are
desired. These parent or stock-plants are called "stools" by nurserymen.

[Illustration: Fig. 21. Mound Layering of Gooseberry.]

In many species layerage is performed to best advantage by heaping
earth over the stool and around the shoots. This is known as _mound_ or
_stool layering_. The shoots send out roots near the base and straight,
stocky plants are obtained. The English gooseberries are almost
exclusively propagated in this manner in this country. Fig. 21 shows a
row of mound-layered gooseberries. The shoots are allowed to remain in
layerage two years, in the case of English gooseberries, if the best
plants are wanted, but in many species the operation is completed in
a single season. Quinces and Paradise apple stocks are extensively
mound-layered. The practice is most useful in those low plants which
produce short and rather stiff shoots.

As a rule, the best season for making layers is in spring when the
leaves are forming. Rooting progresses rapidly at that season. Many
plants "bleed" if layered earlier in the season. Hardy shrubs may
be layered in the fall, either early or late, and if an incision is
made, a callus will have formed by spring. If rapid multiplication is
desired, the soft and growing shoots may be layered during the summer.
This operation is variously known as "summer," "herbaceous," "green"
and "soft" layering. Comparatively feeble plants usually result from
this practice, and it is not in common favor.

[Illustration: Fig. 22. Pot layerage.]

_Pot layering_, _circumposition_, _air layering_ and _Chinese layering_
are terms applied to the rooting of rigid stems by means of surrounding
them, while in their natural position, by earth or moss, or similar
material. The stem is wounded--commonly girdled--and a divided pot or
box is placed about it and filled with earth (Fig. 22). The roots start
from above the girdle, and when they have filled the pot the stem is
severed, headed back, and planted. Pot layering is practiced almost
exclusively in greenhouses, where it is possible to keep the earth
uniformly moist. But even there it is advisable to wrap the pot in moss
to check evaporation from the soil. Some plants can be readily rooted
by wrapping them with moss alone. Pot layering is employed not only
for the purpose of multiplying plants, but in order to lower the heads
of "leggy" or scraggly specimens. The pot is inserted at the required
point upon the main stem, and after roots have formed abundantly the
top may be cut off and potted independently, the old stump being
discarded.

[Illustration: Fig. 23. Layering pot.]

[Illustration: Fig. 24. Layering cone.]

[Illustration: Fig. 25. Layering cup.]

[Illustration: Fig. 26. Layering cup.]

[Illustration: Fig. 27. Compound layering pot.]

The French have various handy devices for facilitating pot layering.
Fig. 23 shows a layering pot, provided with a niche in the side to
receive the stem, and a flange behind for securing if to a support.
Fig. 24 represents a layering cone. It is made of zinc or other metal,
usually four or five inches high, and is composed of two semi-circular
wings which are hinged on the back and are secured in front, when the
instrument is closed, by means of a hinge-pin. A cord is inserted
in one side with which to hang it on a support. A cup or pot with a
removable side is also used. This is shown open in Fig. 25 and closed
in Fig. 26. An ingenious compound layering pot is shown in Fig. 27. The
main stem or trunk of the plant is carried through the large opening,
and the branches are taken through the smaller pots at the side. Kier's
layering boxes or racks are shown in Figs. 28 and 29. The trays are
filled with earth and the branches are laid in through the chinks in
the border and are treated in the same manner as ordinary out-door
layers. These racks supply a neat and convenient means of increasing
greenhouse plants which do not readily strike from cuttings.

[Illustration: Fig. 28. Kier's layering rack.]

It is well to bear in mind that when layers do not give strong plants,
they can be divided into portions and treated as ordinary cuttings.
This is an important operation in the case of rare varieties which
are multiplied by means of soft or green layers, as some of the
large-flowered clematises and grapes. The weak small plants are handled
in a cool greenhouse or under frames, usually in pots, and they soon
make strong individuals.

[Illustration: Fig. 29. Kier's circular layering rack.]




CHAPTER IV.

CUTTAGE.

  =Cuttage.=--The practice or process of multiplying plants by means of
  cuttings, or the state or condition of being thus propagated.

  =Cutting.=--A severed portion of a plant, inserted in soil or water
  with the intention that it shall grow; a slip.


Cuttings, particularly of growing parts, demand a moist and uniform
atmosphere, a porous soil and sometimes bottom heat.

[Illustration: Fig. 30. Hand-glass.]

[Illustration: Fig. 31. Small Propagating-box.]

[Illustration: Fig. 32. Propagating-box.]

=Devices for Regulating Moisture and Heat.=--In order to secure a
uniform and moist atmosphere, various propagating-frames are devised.
Whatever its construction, the frame should be sufficiently tight
to confine the air closely, it should admit light, and allow of
ventilation. The simplest form of propagating-frame is a pot or box
covered with a pane of glass. To admit of ventilation the glass is
tilted at intervals, or two panes may be used and a space be allowed to
remain between them. A common bell-glass or bell-jar (_cloche_ of the
French) makes one of the best and handiest propagating-frames because
it admits light upon all sides and is convenient to handle. These are
in universal use for all difficult and rare subjects which are not
propagated in large numbers. A hand-glass or hand-light (Fig. 30)
answers the same purpose and accommodates a larger number of plants. A
useful propagating-box for the window garden or amateur conservatory is
shown in Fig. 31. A box two or three inches high is secured, and inside
this a zinc or galvanized iron tray, _a_, is set, leaving sufficient
space between it and the box to admit a pane of glass upon every side.
These panes form the four sides of the box, and one or two panes are
laid across the top. The metal tray holds the soil and allows no water
to drip upon the floor. One of the best boxes for general purposes
is made in the form of a simple board box without top or bottom,
and fifteen or eighteen inches high, the top being covered with two
sashes, one of which raises upon a hinge (Fig. 32). Four by three feet
is a convenient size. An ordinary light hot-bed frame is sometimes
constructed upon the bench of a greenhouse and covered with common
hot-bed sash. Propagating houses are sometimes built with permanent
propagating-frames of this character throughout their length.

[Illustration: Fig. 33. Simple Propagating-oven.]

[Illustration: Fig. 34. Propagating-oven.]

In all the above appliances heat is obtained from the sun or from the
bench-pipes or flues of a greenhouse. There are various contrivances
in which the heat is applied locally, for the purpose of securing
greater or more uniform heat. One of the simplest and best of these
is the propagating-oven shown in Fig. 33. It is a glass covered box
about two feet deep, with a tray of water beneath the soil, and which
is heated by a lamp. A similar but somewhat complicated apparatus is
illustrated in Figs. 34, 35, 36. This is an old form of oven, which
has been variously modified by different operators. Fig. 34 shows a
sectional view of the complete apparatus. The box, A A, is made of wood
and is usually about three feet square. L is a removable glass top. B
represents a zinc or galvanized iron tray which is filled with earth in
which seeds are sown or pots are plunged. C is a water tray to which
the water is applied by means of a funnel extending through the box.
A lamp, D, supplies the heat. A funnel of tin, _e e_, distributes
the heat evenly. Holes should be provided about the bottom of the box
to admit air to the flame. A modified form of this device is shown
in Figs. 35 and 36. The water tray, G, slides in upon ledges so that
it can be removed, and the heat funnel, L D L, slides in similarly
and is made to surround the flame like a chimney. The front side of
the apparatus is removable, and the top of the frame, K, is made of
metal. The cover for this apparatus is figured in Fig. 36. The ends,
_a a_, are made of wood, with openings, indicated by the arrows, to
allow of ventilation. The front and top, _g g_, are made of glass. The
frame-work, _c c c_, is made of metal. The cover is hinged on, or held
with pegs, I I, Fig. 35.

[Illustration: Fig. 35. Modified form of Fig. 34.]

[Illustration: Fig. 36. Cover for Fig 35.]

Chauvière's propagating-frame, an apparatus used by the French, is
shown in Fig. 37. It is essentially a miniature greenhouse. The sashes
are seen at _c c_, and above them is a cloth or matting screen. The
sides below the sashes are enclosed, preferably with glass. The bottom
or floor is moveable, and it is sometimes divided into two or three
sections to allow for the accommodation of plants of different sizes
and requirements. These sections are raised or lowered and are held
by pegs. At a is shown a section of floor elevated, and at the left
another section occupying a lower position. Heat is supplied usually
by hot water in the tubes, _d d_. A very elaborate circular French
device, known as Lecoq's propagating-oven, is illustrated in Fig. 38.
It is an interesting apparatus, and is worth attention as showing
the care which has been taken to control the conditions of vegetation
and germination. It is too elaborate for common purposes, and yet for
the growing of certain rare or difficult subjects it might find favor
among those who like to experiment; and it affords an accurate means of
studying plant growth under control. The apparatus is sold in France
for about $6. All the portion below the glass top, _P p_, is made
of earthenware. The base, _a a_, holds a lamp, _d_; _e_ is a water
reservoir to which water is supplied by means of the funnel, _j_. A
vase or rim, _b b_, rests upon the base, and upon it a plate or disc,
_c c_, is fitted. Above this is a glass top, _P p_. Air is admitted
to the apparatus at _i_, _K K_, and between the vase and plate, as at
_c_ on the right. The plate contains two circular grooves, _g g_ and
_h h_. In these grooves the soil is placed or pots plunged. The heat
circulates in the valleys _m_ and _n n n n_, and supplies a uniform
temperature to both sides of the plants.

[Illustration: Fig. 37. Chauvière's Propagating-oven.]

[Illustration: Fig. 38. Lecoq's Propagating-oven.]

[Illustration: Fig. 39. Barnard's Propagating-tank.]

Barnard's propagating-tank, Fig. 39, is a practicable device for
attachment to a common stove. A similar apparatus may be attached to
the pipes of a greenhouse. The tank consists of a long wooden box made
of matched boards, and put together with paint between the joints to
make the box water-tight. The box should be about three feet wide and
ten inches deep, and may be from ten to thirty feet long, according to
the space required. In the middle of the box is a partition, extending
nearly the whole length of the box, and on the inside, on each side,
is a ledge or piece of moulding to support slates to be laid over the
entire surface of the box. The slates are supported by the ledges and
by the central partition, and should be fastened down with cement to
prevent the propagating sand from falling into the tank. One slate is
left out near the end, next the fire, to enable the operator to see the
water and to keep it at the right level. On the slates sand is spread,
in which the cuttings may be struck, the sand nearly filling the box.
At one end of the box is placed a common cylinder stove, with pipe
to the chimney. Inside the stove is a lead or iron pipe (iron is the
best) bent in a spiral. This coil, which is directly in the fire, is
connected by iron pipes with the tank, one pipe leading to one side
of the partition and the other to the opposite side, as shown in the
drawing. If water is placed in the tank it will fill the pipes and form
a continuous circulating system through the pipes and up one side of
the box past the end of the partition, and down the other side. A fire
in the stove causes the water to circulate through the tank and impart
to the bed a genial warmth.

[Illustration: Fig. 40. Zinc Propagating-tank.]

There are various tanks designed to rest upon the pipes in a
greenhouse. The principle of their construction is essentially the
same as of those described in previous pages--bottom heat, a tray of
water, and a bed of soil. Earthenware tanks are commonly employed, but
a recent English device, Fig. 40, is made of zinc. It is about seven
inches deep, and holds an inch or two of water in the bottom. A tray
five inches deep sets into the tank. The water is supplied through a
funnel at the base.

Cuttings usually "strike" better when they touch the side of the pot
than when they are wholly surrounded by soil. This is because the
earthenware allows greater uniformity in moisture than the earth, and
supplies air and a mild bottom heat. Various devices are employed for
the purpose of securing these advantages to the best effect. These are
usually double pots, in one of which water is placed. A good method
is that represented in Fig. 41, which shows a pot, _b_, plugged with
plaster of Paris at the bottom, placed inside a larger one. The earth
is placed between the two, drainage material occupying the bottom,
_a_, and fine soil the top, _c_. Water stands in the inner pot as high
as the dotted line and feeds uniformly into the surrounding soil. The
positions of the water and soil are frequently reversed, but in that
case there is less space available for cuttings. Neumann's cutting-pot
is shown in Fig. 42. This contains an inverted pot in the center, _a_,
designed to supply drainage and to admit heat into the center of the
mass of soil.

[Illustration: Fig. 41. Forsyth's Cutting-pot.]

Some kind of protection, commonly combined with bottom heat, is always
given cuttings made from the soft and growing parts. In in-door work,
any of the devices named above may be employed, but a box like that
shown in Fig. 32 is one of the most useful for common operations. Or
the greenhouse itself may afford sufficient protection, especially if
the cuttings are shaded when first set to check evaporation from the
plant and soil, and to prevent too great heat. This shading is usually
supplied by whitewashing the glass, or a newspaper may be laid over the
cutting bed for a few days. A greenhouse table or bench prepared for
the growing of cuttings is known as a "cutting bench." If the cuttings
become too dry or too hot, they will wilt or "flag." In out-door
work soft cuttings are usually placed in an ordinary cold-frame, and
these frames must be shaded. They may be placed under trees or on the
shady side of a building, or if they are numerous, as in commercial
establishments, a cloth screen should be provided as shown in Fig. 5,
page 13.

[Illustration: Fig. 42. Neumann's Cutting-pot.]

=Soils and General Methods.=--Soil for all cuttings should be
well-drained. It should not be so compact as to hold a great quantity
of water, nor should it be so loose as to dry out very quickly.
It should not "bake" or form a crust on its surface. As a rule,
especially for cuttings made of growing parts, the soil should not
contain vegetable matter, as such material holds too much water and
it is often directly injurious to the cutting. A coarse sharp, clean
sand is the best material for use in-doors. Very fine sand packs too
hard, and should not be used. Some propagators prefer to use fine
gravel, composed of particles from an eighth to a fourth of an inch
in diameter, and from which all fine material has been washed. This
answers well for green cuttings if a propagating-frame is used to
check evaporation and attention is given to watering, because drainage
is so perfect and the material so quickly permeable that uniformity
of treatment is secured. Damping-off is less liable to occur in
such material than in denser soils. The same advantages are to some
extent present in sphagnum moss and cocoanut fibre, both of which are
sometimes used in place of earth. The "silver sand" used by florists
is a very clean and white sand which derives its particular advantages
from the almost entire absence of any vegetable matter. But it is
not now considered so essential to successful propagation as it was
formerly, and fully as good material may often be found in a common
sand-bank. Cuttings which strike strongly and vigorously may be placed
in a soil made of light garden loam with twice its bulk of sand added
to it. All soils used for in-door cuttage should be sifted or screened
before using to bring them to a uniform texture.

Hard-wood cuttings are commonly planted out-doors in mellow and light
loam, well trenched. Only fine and well-rotted manure should be applied
to the cutting bed, and it should be well mixed with the soil. In most
cases, a well-drained soil gives best results, but some cuttings root
and grow well in wet soils or even in standing water, as poplars,
willows, some of the dogwoods, plane-tree and others.

Bottom heat is always essential to the best success with cuttings.
In out-door work this is supplied by the natural heat of the soil in
spring and summer, and it is often intensified by burying hard-wooded
cuttings bottom end up for a time before planting them. This operation
of inverting cuttings is often practiced with grapes, particularly with
the Delaware and others which root with some difficulty. The cuttings
are tied in bundles and are buried in a sandy place, with the tops
down, the butts being covered two or three inches with sand. They may
be put in this position in the fall and allowed to remain until the
ground begins to freeze hard, or they may be buried in spring and
allowed to remain until May or June and then be regularly planted. In
out-door cuttage, the cuttings which are of medium length, from six to
eight inches, derive more bottom heat than the very long ones, such
as were formerly used for the propagation of the grape. In in-door
work bottom heat is obtained artificially. Cutting benches should
have abundant piping beneath, and in the case of many tropical and
sub-tropical species the bottom heat may be intensified by enclosing
the benches below so that no heat can escape into the house. Doors can
be placed in the partition alongside the walk to serve as ventilators
if the heat should become too intense. In all cuttings, bottom or root
growth should precede top growth, and this is aided by bottom heat.

[Illustration: Fig. 43. Grape cutting.]

As a rule, roots arise most readily from a joint, and it is therefore
a common practice to cut off the base of the cutting just below a
bud, as shown in the grape cutting, Fig. 43. Sometimes the cutting is
severed at its point of attachment to the parent branch, and a small
portion, or "heel," of that branch is allowed to remain on the cutting.
This heel may be nothing more than the curved and hardened base of the
cutting at its point of attachment, as in the cornus cutting, Fig. 44.
Sometimes an entire section of the parent branch is removed with the
cutting, as in the "mallet" cuttings of grapes, Fig. 45. Of course,
comparatively few heel or mallet cuttings can be made from a plant,
as only one cutting is obtained from a branch, and it is advisable,
therefore, to "cut to buds" rather than "cut to heels;" yet there are
many plants which demand a heel, if satisfactory results are to be
obtained. The requirements of the different species in this direction
can be learned only by experience, but it may be said that in general
the hardest or closest wooded plants require a heel or a joint at
the base. Willows, currants, basswoods, and others with like soft
wood, emit roots readily between the buds, yet even in these cases
propagators quite usually cut to buds.

[Illustration: Fig. 44. Heel cutting of Cornus.]

Wounds upon plants begin to heal by the formation of loose cellular
matter which gives rise to a mass of tissue known as a _callus_. This
tissue eventually covers the entire wound, if complete healing results.
As a rule, the first apparent change in a cutting is the formation of
a callus upon the lower end, and it is commonly supposed that this
process must be well progressed before roots can form. But roots do
not necessarily arise from the callus, and in many plants they appear
to bear no relation to it in position. In willows, for instance,
roots arise from the bark quite irregularly and at some distance from
the callus. Yet, as a matter of practice, best results are obtained
from callused cuttings, particularly if the cuttings are made from
mature wood, but this is probably due quite as much to the fact that
considerable time is required for the formation of the adventitious
buds which give rise to the roots as from any connection between the
callusing and rooting processes themselves. Hard-wood cuttings give
better results when kept dormant for some time after they are cut. They
are usually made in the fall, and stored during the winter in sand,
sawdust or moss in a cool cellar, or buried in a sandy and well-drained
place. This, at least, is the practice with hard-wood cuttings of
deciduous plants. Hard-wood evergreen cuttings, when taken in the fall,
are usually set at once, as their foliage will not allow them to be
buried with safety; but in this case, the cuttings are kept "quiet"
or dormant for a time, to allow callusing to progress. If cuttings
are buried so deep that they cannot sprout, callusing may be hastened
by placing them in a mild temperature. Single-eye grape cuttings are
sometimes packed between layers of sand in a barrel and the barrel is
set under a forcing-house bench where the temperature is about 50°.
Eight or ten inches of sand is usually placed over the top layer. In
this manner, cuttings which have been obtained in winter or spring can
be callused before planting time.

[Illustration: Fig. 45. Mallet cutting of grape.]

It is a singular fact that the lower end of the cutting, as it stood
upon the parent plant, produces roots and the upper end produces leaves
and shoots, even if the cutting is inverted. And if the cutting is
divided into several parts, each part will still exhibit this same
differentiation of function. This is true even of root-cuttings, and of
other cuttings which possess no buds. The reasons for this localization
of function are not yet clearly understood, although the phenomenon has
lately been the subject of study. Upon this fact depends the hastening
of the rooting process in inverted cuttings by the direct application
of heat to the bottoms, and it likewise indicates that care must be
taken to plant cuttings in approximately their natural direction if
straight and handsome plants are desired.

The particular method of making the cutting and the treatment to which
it should be subjected, must be determined for each species or genus.
Some plants, as many maples, can be propagated from wood two or three
years old, but in most cases the wood of the previous or present
season's growth is required. Nearly all soft and loose wooded plants
grow readily from hard-wood cuttings, while those with dense wood are
often multiplied more easily from soft or growing wood. Some plants,
as oaks and hickories, are propagated from cuttings of any description
only with great difficulty. It is probable, however, that all plants
can be multiplied by cuttings if properly treated. It often happens
that one or two species of a closely defined genus will propagate
readily from cuttings while the other species will not, so that the
propagator comes to learn by experience that different treatment is
profitable for very closely related plants. For instance, most of the
viburnums are propagated from layers in commercial establishments, but
_V. plicatum_ is grown extensively from cuttings.

=Particular Methods--Kinds of Cuttings.=--Cuttings are made from all
parts of the plant. In its lowest terms, cuttage is a division of the
plant itself into two or more nearly equal parts, as in the division
of crowns of rhubarb, dicentra, and most other plants which tend to
form broad masses or stools. This species of cuttage is at times
indistinguishable from separation, as in the dividing of lily bulbs
(page 25), and at other times it is essentially the same as layerage,
as in the dividing of stools which have arisen from suckers or layers.
This breaking or cutting up of the plants into two or more large parts
which are already rooted is technically known as _division_. It is
only necessary, in dividing plants, to see that one or more buds or
shoots remain upon the portions, and these portions are then treated in
the same manner as independent mature plants; or sometimes, when the
divisions are small and weak, they may be handled for a time in a frame
or forcing-house in the same manner as ordinary cuttings.

Cuttings proper may be divided into four general classes: 1, of tubers;
2, of roots and root-stocks; 3, of stems; 4, of leaves.

=1. Tuber Cuttings.=--Tubers are thickened portions of either roots
or stems, and tuber cuttings therefore fall logically under classes
2 and 3; but they are so unlike ordinary cuttings that a separate
classification is desirable. Tubers are stored with starch, which is
designed to support or supply the plant in time of need. Tuber cuttings
are therefore able to support themselves for a time if they are placed
in conditions suited to their vegetation. Roots rarely arise from the
tubers themselves, but from the base of the young shoots which spring
from them. This fact is familiarly illustrated in the cuttings of
Irish and sweet potatoes. The young sprouts can be removed and planted
separately and others will arise from the tuber to take their places.
This practice is employed sometimes with new or scarce varieties of the
Irish potato, and three or four crops of rooted sprouts can be obtained
from one tuber. The tuber is cut in two lengthwise and is then laid in
damp moss or loose earth with the cut surface down, and as soon as the
sprouts throw out roots sufficient to maintain them they are severed
and potted off. Sweet potatoes are nearly always propagated in this
manner.

In making tuber cuttings, at least one eye or bud is left to each
piece, if eyes are present; but in root-tubers, like the sweet potato,
there are no buds, and it is only necessary to leave upon each portion
a piece of the epidermis from which adventitious buds may develop. The
pseudo-bulbs of some orchids are treated in this manner, or the whole
bulb is sometimes planted. A shoot, usually termed an off-shoot, arises
from each pseudo-bulb or each piece of it, and this is potted off as an
independent plant. (See Orchids, in Chapter VI.)

Cuttings made from the ordinary stems of some tuberiferous plants will
produce tubers instead of plants. This is the case sometimes with the
potato. The cutting produces a small tuber near its lower extremity,
or sometimes in the axil of a leaf above ground, and this tuber must
be planted to secure a new plant. Leaf cuttings of some tuberiferous
or bulbiferous plants produce little tubers or bulbs in the same way.
Hyacinth leaves, inserted in sand in a frame, will soon produce little
bulblets at their base, and these can be removed and planted in the
same manner as the bulbels described in Chapter II.

[Illustration: Fig. 46. Root-cutting of Blackberry.]

Many tubers or tuber-like portions, which possess a very moist or soft
interior and a hard or close covering, vegetate more satisfactorily if
allowed to dry for a time before planting. The pseudo-bulbs of orchids,
crowns of pine-apples and cuttings of cactuses are examples. Portions
of cactuses and pine-apples are sometimes allowed to lie in the sun
from two to four weeks before planting. This treatment dissipates the
excessive moisture and induces the formation of adventitious buds.

[Illustration: Fig. 47. Root-cutting of Dracæna.]

=2. Root Cuttings.=--Many plants can be multiplied with ease by means
of short cuttings of the roots, particularly all species which posses
a natural tendency to "sucker" or send up sprouts from the root. All
root-stocks or underground stems can be made into cuttings. True root
cuttings possess no buds whatever; the buds develop after the cutting
is planted. Roots are cut into pieces from one to three inches long and
are planted horizontally in soil or moss. These cuttings thrive best
with bottom heat, but blackberries and some other plants, grow readily
with ordinary out-door treatment. A root-cutting of the blackberry is
shown in Fig. 46. (See Blackberry, in Chapter VI.) A growing dracæna
cutting is exhibited in Fig. 47. The cuttings of this plant are handled
in a propagating-frame or on a cutting bench in a warm greenhouse. The
bouvardias and many other plants can be grown in the same manner. Many
of the fruit-trees, as peach, cherry, apple and pear, can be grown
readily from these short root-cuttings in a frame. Variegation cannot
always be transmitted by root-cutting, _e. g._, _Symphytum asperrimum,
variegatum_. Among kitchen garden plants, the horse-radish is the most
familiar example of propagation by root-cuttings. The small side roots,
a fourth inch or so in diameter, are removed when the horse-radish is
dug in fall or spring, and are cut into four to six inch lengths, as
seen in Fig. 48. These cuttings are known as "sets" among gardeners.
(See Horse-radish, Chapter VI.) When the crowns of horse-radish are
cut and used for propagation, the operation falls strictly under
division, from the fact that buds or eyes are present; and the same
remark applies to rhubarb, which, however, is not propagated by true
root-cuttings.

[Illustration: Fig. 48. Horse-radish root-cuttings.]

=3. Stem Cuttings.=--Cuttings of the stem divide themselves into two
general classes: those known as cutting of the ripe, mature or hard
wood, and cuttings of the green, immature or soft wood. The two classes
run into each other; no hard and fast lines can be drawn.

_Hard-wood cuttings_ are made at any time from late summer to spring.
It is advisable to make them in the fall in order to allow them to
callus before the planting season, and to forestall injury which
might result to the parent plant from a severe winter. They may be
taken as early as August, or as soon as the wood is mature, and be
stripped of leaves. Callusing can then take place in time to allow
of fall planting. Or the cuttings taken in early fall may be planted
immediately and be allowed to callus where they stand. All fall cutting
beds should be mulched to prevent the heaving of the cuttings. As a
rule, however, hard-wood cuttings are buried on a sandy knoll or are
stored in moss, sand or sawdust in a cellar until spring. (See page 50.)

There is no general rule to govern the length of hard-wood cuttings.
Most propagators prefer to make them six to ten inches long, as this is
a convenient length to handle. Two buds are always to be taken, one bud
or one pair at the top and also at the bottom, but in "short-jointed"
plants more are obtained. Sometimes all but the top buds are removed
to prevent the appearance of too many shoots. Grape cuttings are now
commonly cut to two or three buds (Fig. 43), two being the favorite
number for most varieties. (See Grape, Chapter VI.) Currant and
gooseberry cuttings (Fig. 49) usually bear from six to ten buds. All
long hard-wood cuttings are set perpendicularly, or nearly so, and only
one or two buds are allowed to stand above the surface.

[Illustration: Fig. 49. Currant cutting.]

When the stock is rare, cuttings are made of single eyes or buds.
This is particularly the case with the grape (see Chapter VI), and
currants and many other plants are occasionally grown in the same
manner. Fig. 50 shows a single eye grape cutting. These cuttings,
whatever the species, are commonly started under glass with bottom
heat, either upon a cutting bench or in a hot-bed. The soil should be
kept uniformly moist, and when the leaves appear the plants should be
frequently sprinkled. In from thirty to forty days the plants are ready
to pot off. Single eye cuttings are usually started about three or
four months before the season is fit for out-door planting, or about
February in the northern states. The most advisable method of treatment
varies with the season and locality as well as with the species or
variety. It is well known, for instance, that the Delaware grape can
be propagated more easily in some regions than in others. A common
style of single eye cutting is made with the eye close to the top end,
and a naked base of an inch or two. This is inserted into the soil
perpendicularly, with the eye just above the surface. It is much used
for a variety of plants.

[Illustration: Fig. 50. Single-eye Grape cutting.]

Many coniferous plants are increased by cuttings on a large scale,
especially retinosporas, arbor-vitæs, and the like. Cuttings are made
of the mature wood, which is planted at once (in autumn) in sand under
cover, usually in a cool greenhouse. Most of the species root slowly
and they often remain in the original flats or benches a year, but
their treatment is usually simple. In some cases junipers, yews and
_Cryptomeria Japonica_ will not make roots for nearly twelve months,
keeping in good foliage however, and ultimately giving good plants.
(For more explicit directions, see Thuya and Retinospora in Chapter VI.)

Most remarkable instances of propagation by means of portions of stems
are on record. Chips from a tree trunk have been known to produce
plants, and the olive is readily increased by knots or excrescences
formed upon the trunks of old trees. These excrescences occur in many
plants and are known as _knaurs_. They are often abundant about the
base of large plane-trees. But they are not often used for purposes of
propagation. Whole trunks will sometimes grow after having been cut for
many months, especially of such plants as cactuses, many euphorbias
and yuccas. And sections of these spongy trunks will grow, also. Even
saw-logs of our common trees, as elm and ash, will sprout while in the
"boom," or water.

_Green-wood cuttings_ are more commonly employed than those from
the mature wood, as they "strike" more quickly, they can be handled
under glass in the winter, and more species can be propagated by them
than by hard-wood cuttings. "Slips" are green-wooded cuttings, but
the term is often restricted to designate those which are made by
pulling or "slipping" off a small side shoot. All soft-wooded plants
and many ornamental shrubs are increased by green cuttings. There
are two general classes of green-wood cuttings: those made from the
soft and still growing wood, and those made from the nearly ripened
green-wood, as in _Azalea Indica_, oleander, ficus, etc. House plants,
as geraniums, coleuses, carnations, fuchsias, and the like, are grown
from the soft young wood, and many harder-wooded plants are grown in
the same way. Sometimes truly hard wood is used, as in camellia.

[Illustration: Fig. 51. Tough and brittle wood.]

In making cuttings from soft and growing shoots, the first thing to
learn is the proper texture or age of shoot. A very soft and flabby
cutting does not grow readily, or if it does it is particularly liable
to damp-off, and it usually makes a weak plant. Too old wood is slow
to root, makes a poor plant and is handled with difficulty in many
species. The ordinary test for beginners is the manner in which the
shoot breaks. If, upon being bent, the shoot snaps off squarely so
as to hang together with only a bit of bark, as in the upper break
in Fig. 51, it is in the proper condition for cuttings; but if it
bends or simply crushes, as in the lower portion of the figure, it is
either too old or too young for good results. The tips of the shoots
of soft-wooded plants are usually employed, and all or a portion of
the leaves are allowed to remain. They are inserted in sharp sand
to a sufficient depth to hold them in place, and the atmosphere and
soil must be kept moist to prevent wilting or "flagging". The cuttings
should also be shaded for the first week or two. A propagating-frame
is often employed. Soft cuttings are commonly cut below a bud or
cut to a heel, but this is unnecessary in easily rooted plants like
geranium, coleus, heliotrope, etc. Fig. 52 shows an oleander cutting
at _a_, a carnation at _b_, and a geranium at _c_. A coleus cutting is
illustrated in Fig. 53. Sometimes the growth is so short or the stock
so scarce that the cutting cannot be made long enough to hold itself in
the soil. In such case a toothpick or splinter is tied to the cutting
to hold it erect, as in the cactus cutting, Fig. 54, or the geranium
cutting, Fig. 55. In the window garden, soft cuttings may be started
in a deep plate which is filled half or two-thirds full of sand and
is then filled to the brim with water, and not shaded; this method,
practiced on a larger scale, is sometimes useful during the hot summer
months. If bottom heat is desired, the plate may be set upon the back
part of the kitchen stove. Oleanders usually root best when mature
shoots are placed in bottles of water.

[Illustration: Fig. 52. Soft cuttings.]

[Illustration: Fig. 53. Coleus cutting.]

Cuttings from the nearly mature green-wood are employed for hard-wooded
trees and shrubs, as diervillas (weigela), roses, hydrangeas, lilacs,
etc. They are cut in essentially the same manner as the hard-wood
cuttings described on page 55. They are often taken in summer when the
buds have developed and the wood has about attained its growth. They
are cut to two to four or five buds and are planted an inch or two deep
in shaded frames. They are kept close for some days after setting,
and the tops are sprinkled frequently. Care must be taken not to set
them too deep; they are rarely put in over an inch, if the cutting
is six or seven inches long. "June stock cuttings" are sometimes
advantageously made; here the young shoots of hardy shrubs are taken,
when about two to three inches long, the leaves partly removed, and
they are planted under glass, precisely as the geranium is treated in
the autumn. Several weeks are required for rooting, but good plants are
obtained which, when wintered in a cold-frame, can be planted out in
beds the next spring. Great care must be given to shading and watering.
_Hydrangea paniculata_ var. _grandiflora_, and _Akebia quinata_ are
examples; or any deutzia or more easily handled plant of which stock is
scarce may be cited.

[Illustration: Fig. 54. Cactus cutting held by splinter.]

[Illustration: Fig. 55. Cutting held by toothpick.]

Part of the leaves are removed, as a rule, before the cuttings are set,
as shown in the rose cutting, Fig. 56, and the hydrangea cutting, Fig.
57. This is not essential, however, but it lessens evaporation and the
tendency to "flag" or wilt. In most species the top can be cut off the
cutting, as seen in Figs. 44 and 57, but in other cases it seriously
injures the cutting. Fig. 58 shows a weigela cutting from which the top
was clipped. An unusually large callus formed at the bottom, but the
leaves shrivelled and the cutting is dead. This frequently occurs in
what some nurserymen call "end growers," among which may be mentioned
weigelas (properly diervillas), the shrubby altheas, _Cercis Japonica_,
and such spireas as _S. cratægifolia_, _S. rotundifolia_ var. _alba_
and _S. Cantonensis_ (_S. Reevesii_ of the trade) var. _robusta_.

[Illustration: Fig. 56. Rose cutting.]

These hardened cuttings, about two inches long, are often made in the
winter from forced plants. This is particularly the case with roses
(which see in Chapter VI). Cuttings taken in February, in the north,
will be ready to transfer to borders or nursery beds when spring opens.
Stout, well-rooted stock-plants are used from which to obtain these
cuttings, and they are cut back when taken to the house in the fall
in order to induce a good growth. Many hardy shrubs can be easily
propagated in this way when the work is difficult in the open air, _e.
g._, _Spiræa Cantonensis_ (_S. Reevesii_ of the catalogues) and _S. Van
Houttii_. Stock plants of the soft species, like coleus, lantanas and
geraniums, are obtained in like manner.

[Illustration: Fig. 57. Hydrangea cutting.]

=4. Leaf Cuttings.=--Many thick and heavy leaves may be used as
cuttings. Leaf cuttings are most commonly employed in the showy-leaved
begonias, in succulents, and in gloxinias, but many plants can be
propagated by them. Even the cabbage can be made to grow from leaf
cuttings. The whole leaf may be used, as shown in Fig. 59. It is simply
laid upon moist sand in a frame and held down by splinters thrust
through the ribs. The wound made by the peg induces the formation of
roots and a young plant arises. A half dozen or more plants can be
obtained from one leaf. Some operators cut off the ribs, instead of
wounding them with a prick. Many gardeners prefer to divide the leaf
into two nearly equal parts, and then set each part, or the better one,
upright in the soil, the severed edge being covered. This is shown in
Fig. 60. Fewer plants--often only one--are obtained in this manner, but
they are strong.

[Illustration: Fig. 58. Clipped Weigela cutting.]

[Illustration: Fig. 60. A upright Begonia leaf cutting.]

When stock is scarce the leaf may be cut into several fan-shaped
pieces. The whole leaf may be divided into as many triangular portions
as can be obtained with a portion of the petiole, a strong rib, or vein
at the base; these inserted and treated like coleus cuttings will all
root and make good plants within a reasonable time, say six months.
This form of cutting should be two to three inches long by an inch or
inch and one-half wide. Ordinarily, in this style of leaf-cutting,
the petiole or stalk is cut off close to the leaf and the lower third
or fourth of the leaf is then cut off by a nearly straight cut across
the leaf. This somewhat triangular base is then cut into as many
wedge-shaped pieces as there are ribs in the leaf, each rib forming the
center of a cutting. The point of each cutting should contain a portion
of the petiole. The points of these triangular portions are inserted in
the soil a half inch or so, the cutting standing erect or nearly so.
Roots form at the base or point in the ordinary manner.

[Illustration: Fig. 59. Begonia leaf cutting.]

Leaf cuttings are handled in the same manner as soft stem-cuttings
so far as temperature and moisture are concerned. There are
comparatively few species in which they form the most available means
of multiplication. In some cases, variegation will not be reproduced by
the rooted leaf. This is true in the ivy-leaved geranium L'Elegante; a
good plant can be obtained, but it reverts to the plain-leaved type.




CHAPTER V.

GRAFTAGE.

  =Graftage.=--The process or operation of grafting or budding, or the
  state or condition of being grafted or budded.

  =Grafting.=--The operation of inserting a bud or a cion in a stock.
  It is commonly restricted to the operation of inserting cions of
  two or more buds, in distinction from budding, or the operation of
  inserting a single bud in the stock; but there are no essential
  differences between the two operations.

  =Stock.=--In graftage, a plant or part of a plant upon which a cion
  or bud is set. A _free stock_ is a seedling, in distinction from a
  grafted stock.

  =Cion or Scion.=--A portion of a plant which is mechanically inserted
  upon the same or another plant (stock) with the intention that it
  shall grow.


GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.--Graftage is rarely employed for the
propagation of the species, as seedage and cuttage are more expeditious
and cheaper. Its chief use is to perpetuate a variety which does not
reproduce itself from seeds and which cannot be economically grown from
cuttings.

Nearly all the named varieties of tree fruits and many of those of
ornamental trees and shrubs are perpetuated by means of graftage. In
some species which present no marked varieties, however, propagation
by seeds or cuttings is for various reasons so difficult or uncertain
that recourse must be had to graftage. This is particularly true in
many of the firs and spruces which do not produce seeds to any extent
in cultivation. In other cases graftage is performed for the purpose
of producing some radical change in the character or habit of the
plants, as in the dwarfing of pears by grafting them upon the quince,
the elevation of weeping tops by working them upon upright trunks, and
the acceleration of fruit-bearing by setting cions in old plants. It is
sometimes employed to aid the healing of wounds or to repair and fill
out broken tops. And it has been used to make infertile plants fertile,
by grafting in the missing sex in diœcious trees, or a variety with
more potent pollen as practiced in some of the native plums. All these
uses of graftage fall under three heads: 1. To perpetuate a variety.
2. To increase ease and speed of multiplication. 3. To produce some
radical change in nature or habit of cion or stock.

Probably all exogenous plants--those which possess a distinct bark and
pith--can be grafted. Plants must be more or less closely related to
each other to allow of successful graftage of the one upon the other.
What the affinities are in any case can be known only by experiment.
As a rule, plants of close botanical relationship, especially those
of the same genus, graft upon each other with more or less ease; yet
this relationship is by no means a safe guide. A plant will often
thrive better upon a species of another genus than upon a congener.
The pear, for instance, does better upon many thorns than upon the
apple. Sometimes plants of very distinct genera unite readily. Thus
among cacti the leafless epiphyllum grows remarkably well upon the
leaf-bearing pereskia. It should be borne in mind that union of tissues
is not a proof of affinity. Affinity can be measured only by the
thrift, healthfulness and longevity of the cion. The bean has been
known to make a union with the chrysanthemum, but it almost immediately
died. Soft tissues, in particular, often combine in plants which
possess no affinity whatever, as we commonly understand the term.
Neither does affinity refer to relative sizes or rates of growth of
stock and cion, although the term is sometimes used in this sense.
It cannot be said that some varieties of pear lack affinity for the
quince, and yet the pear cion grows much larger than the stock. In
fact, it is just this difference in size and rate of growth which
constitutes the value of the quince root for dwarfing the pear. When
there is a marked difference in rate of growth between the stock and
cion, an enlargement will occur in the course of time, either above or
below the union. If this occurs upon the stem, it makes an unsightly
tree. If the cion greatly outgrows the stock a weak tree is the result.

Graftage can be performed at almost any time of the year, but the
practice must be greatly varied to suit the season and other
conditions. The one essential point is to make sure that the cambium
layers, lying between the bark and wood, meet as nearly as possible
in the cion and stock. This cambium is always present in live parts,
forming woody substance from its inner surface and bark from its outer
surface. During the season of greatest growth it usually occurs as a
soft, mucilaginous and more or less unorganized substance, and in this
stage it most readily repairs and unites wounded surfaces. And for this
reason the grafting and budding of old trees are usually performed in
the spring. Later in the season, the cambium becomes firmer and more
differentiated, and union of woody parts is more uncertain. It is
also necessary to cover the wounds in order to check evaporation from
the tissues. In out-door work wax is commonly used for all species of
graftage which wound the wood itself, but in budding, the loosened
bark, bound down securely by a bandage, affords sufficient protection.
It is commonly supposed that an ordinary cleft-graft cannot live if
the bark of the stock immediately adjoining it is seriously wounded,
but the bark really serves little purpose beyond protection of the
tissues beneath. A cion will grow when the bark is entirely removed
from the stub if some adequate protection can be given which will not
interfere with the formation of new bark. The cion must always possess
at least one good bud. In most cases, only buds which are mature or
nearly so are used, but in the grafting of herbs very young buds may
be employed. These simple requirements can be satisfied in an almost
innumerable variety of ways. The cion or bud may be inserted in the
root, crown, trunk or any of the branches; it may be set under the bark
simply or inserted into the wood itself in almost any fashion; and the
operation may be performed either upon growing or dormant plants at any
season. But in practice there are comparatively few methods which are
sufficiently simple and expeditious to admit of general use.

Graftage may be divided into three general divisions, between which,
however, there are no decisive lines of separation: 1. Bud-grafting or
budding, in which a single bud is inserted upon the surface of the wood
of the stock. 2. Cion-grafting or grafting proper, in which a detached
twig bearing one or more buds is inserted into or upon the stock. 3.
Inarching or grafting by approach, in which the cion remains attached
to the parent plant until union takes place. Each of these divisions
can be almost endlessly varied and sub-divided, but in this discussion
only the leading practices can be detailed. The following enumeration,
after Baltet, will give a fair idea of the kinds of grafting which have
been employed under distinct names:


1. Bud-Grafting or Budding.

    1.--Grafting with shield-buds.
        Bud-grafting under the bark, or by inoculation.
          "    "     ordinary method.
          "    "     with a cross-shaped incision.
          "    "       "  the incision reversed.
          "    "     by veneering.
        Bud-grafting, the combined or double method.
    2.--Flute-grafting.
          "      "    common method.
          "      "    with strips of bark.


2. Cion-Grafting or Grafting Proper.

    1.--Side-grafting under the bark.
          "      "    with a simple branch.
          "      "    with a heeled branch.
          "      "    in the alburnum.
          "      "    with a straight cleft.
          "      "    with an oblique cleft.
    2.--Crown-grafting.
        Ordinary method.
        Improved method.
    3.--Grafting _de precision_.
        Veneering, common method.
            "      in crown-grafting.
            "      with strips of bark.
        Crown-grafting by inlaying.
        Side-grafting by inlaying.
    4.--Cleft-grafting, common single.

        Cleft-grafting, common double.
          "      "      oblique.
          "      "      terminal.
          "      "          "    woody.
          "      "          "    herbaceous.
    5.--Whip-grafting,  simple.
          "      "      complex.
        Saddle-grafting.
    6.--Mixed-grafting.
        Grafting with cuttings.
        When the cion is a cutting.
        When the stock is a cutting.
        When both are cuttings.
        Root-grafting of a plant on its own root.
          "      "      "        "  the roots of another plant.
        Grafting with fruit buds.


3. Inarching or Grafting by Approach.

    1.--Method by veneering.
          "    "  inlaying.
        English method.
    2.--Inarching  with an eye.
          "          "  a branch.

=Particular Methods.=--_Budding._ Budding is the operation of inserting
a single bud, bearing little or no wood, upon the surface of the stock.
The bud is nearly always inserted under the bark of the stock, but in
flute-budding a piece of bark is entirely removed and the bud is used
to cover the wound. There is no general rule to determine what species
of plants should be budded and which ones cion grafted. In fact, the
same species is often multiplied by both operations. Plants with thin
bark and an abundance of sap are likely to do best when grafted; or
if they are budded, the buds should be inserted at a season when the
sap is least abundant to prevent the "strangulation" or "throwing out"
of the bud. In such species the bark is not strong enough to hold the
bud firmly until it unites; and solid union does not take place until
the flow of sap lessens. Budding is largely employed upon nearly all
young fruit-trees, and almost universally so upon the stone-fruits. It
is also used in roses, and many ornamental trees. Budding is commonly
performed during the growing season, usually in late summer or early
fall, because mature buds can be procured at that time and young stocks
are then large enough to be worked readily. But budding can be done in
early spring, just as soon as the bark loosens; in this case perfectly
dormant buds must have been taken in winter. Budding is always best
performed when the bark slips or peels easily. It can be done when the
bark is tight, but the operation is then tedious and uncertain.

Shield-budding.--There is but one style of budding in general use in
this country. This is known as shield-budding, from the shield-like
shape of the portion of bark which is removed with the bud.
Technically, the entire severed portion, comprising both bark and bud,
is called a "bud." A shield bud is shown natural size in Fig. 61. This
is cut from a young twig of the present season's growth. It is inserted
underneath the bark of a young stock or branch, and is then securely
tied, as shown in Fig. 65.

[Illustration: Fig. 61. Shield-bud.]

The minor details of shield-budding differ with nearly every operator.
In commercial practice, it is performed in the north from early July
until the middle of September. In the southern states it usually begins
in June. As a rule, apples and pears are budded before peaches. This
is due to the fact that peach-stocks are nearly always budded the same
season the pits are planted, and the operation must be delayed until
the stocks are large enough to be worked. Most other fruit-stocks,
especially apples and pears, are not budded until two years after the
seeds are sown. The plants grow for the first season in a seed-bed.
The next spring they are transplanted into nursery rows, and budded
when they become large enough, which is usually the same year they are
transplanted. The nurseryman reckons the age of his stock from the time
of transplanting, and the age of the marketable tree from the time when
the buds or grafts begin to grow. The young stocks are "dressed" or
trimmed before being set into the nursery. This operation consists in
cutting off a fourth or third of the top and the tap root. This causes
the roots to spread and induces a vigorous growth of top because it
reduces the numbers of shoots; and such stocks are more expeditiously
handled than long and untrimmed ones.

Stocks should be at least three-eighths inch in diameter to be budded
with ease. Just before the buds are set, the leaves are removed
from the base of the stock so that they will not interfere with the
operation. They are usually rubbed off with the hand for a space of
five or six inches above the ground. They should not be removed more
than two or three days in advance of budding, else the growth of the
parts will be checked and the bark will set; any branches, too, as
in the quince, which might impede the work of the budder, are to be
cut off at the same time. The bud is inserted an inch or two above
the surface of the ground or as low down as the budder can work. The
advantage of setting the bud low is to bring the resulting crook or
union where it will not be seen. It is a common and good practice,
also, to place the bud upon the north side of the stock to shield it
from the sun.

[Illustration: Fig. 62. A stick of buds.]

The buds are taken from strong and well-hardened shoots of the season's
growth and of the desired variety. Usually the whole of the present
growth is cut, the leaves are removed, but a part of the petiole or
stalk of each leaf is left (as in Figs. 61 and 62) to serve as a handle
to the bud. This trimmed shoot is then called a "stick." A stick may
bear two dozen good buds when the growth has been strong, but only
ten or twelve buds are commonly secured. The upper buds, which are
commonly not fully grown and which are borne on soft wood, are usually
discarded. The buds are cut with a thin-bladed sharp knife. Various
styles of budding knives are in use, and the budder usually has decided
preferences for some particular pattern. The essentials of a good
budding-knife are these: the very best steel, a thin blade which has a
curved cutting end (as shown in Figs. 63 and 66), and lightness. The
curved end of the blade is used for making the incisions in the stock.
The handle of the budding-knife usually runs into a thin bone scalpel
at the end, and this portion is designed for the lifting or loosening
of the bark on the stock. Some budders, however, raise the bark with
the blade. A good form of blade, but one seldom made, has a rounded
end, the upper side of the curve being ground simply to a thin edge.
This blade may be used both for cutting the bark and loosening it,
thus overcoming the necessity of reversing the knife every time a bud
is set. If this form of blade were commonly known it would undoubtedly
soon come into favor. The blade of a common budding-knife can be ground
to this shape.

The bud is usually cut about an inch long. Most budders cut from below
upwards, but some prefer to make a downward incision. It does not
matter just how the bud is cut, if the surfaces are smooth and even
and the bud is not too thick. On a stick a fourth or three-eighths
inch through, the cut, at its deepest point just under the bud, is
about one-fourth the diameter of the twig. A bit of wood is therefore
removed with the bud, as shown in Fig. 61. There is some discussion
as to whether this wood should be left upon the bud, but no definite
experiments have been made to show that it is injurious to the
resulting tree. Some budders remove the wood with the point of the
knife or by a deft twist as the bud is removed from the stick. But
buds appear to live equally well with wood attached or removed. Some
propagators cut the buds as they go, while others prefer to cut a whole
stick before setting any, letting each bud hang by a bit of bark at the
top and which is cut off squarely when wanted, as shown in Fig. 62.

The wound or matrix which is to receive the bud is made by two
incisions, one vertical and one transverse (Fig. 63). These are light
cuts, extending only through the bark. The vertical slit is usually
made first and by the rounded end of the blade. This is an inch or
inch and a half long. The transverse cut is made across the top of
the vertical cut by one rocking motion of the blade towards the body.
The corners of the bark may be lifted a little by an outward motion
of the blade so as to allow the bud to be pushed in, but unless the
bark slips very freely it will have to be loosened by the end of the
blade or by the scalpel on the reverse end of the handle, as previously
described. The bud is now inserted in the cleft of the bark. It is
pushed down part way by the fingers, as in Fig. 64, but it is usually
driven home by pushing down upon the leaf-stalk handle with the back
of the knife-blade. The entire bud should pass into the cleft; or if a
portion of it should project above it should be cut off. If the bark
peels freely, the bud will slip in easily and will follow the cleft,
but if it sticks somewhat, more care is necessary to prevent the bud
from running out. If the bark is very tight, it may have to be loosened
with the knife throughout the length of the cleft; but budding should
be performed, if possible, when such pains are not necessary.

[Illustration: Fig. 63. Preparing the stock.]

The bud must now be tied. The whole matrix should be closed and bound
securely, as represented in Fig. 65. The dotted lines parallel with the
cleft show the extent to which the bud projects under the bark. The
string is usually started below the bud, the end being held by lapping
the second course over it, and the upper end being secured by drawing
a bow through under the upper course. Care should be taken not to bind
the string over the bud itself. The strings are previously cut the
required length--about a foot--and the tying is performed very quickly.
Any soft cord can be employed. Yarn and carpet warp are sometimes used.
The most common material, at least until the last few years, has been
bass matting. This is the inner bark of the bass-wood or linden. The
bark is stripped in early summer, and the inner portion is macerated
or "rotted" in water for four or five weeks. It is then removed, cut
into the desired lengths, and stripped into narrow bands--one-fourth to
one-half inch wide--when it may be sorted and stored away for future
use. If it is stiff and harsh when it comes from the maceration,
it should be pounded lightly or rubbed through the hands until it
becomes soft and pliable. The best tying material which we now have
is undoubtedly raffia. It is an imported article, coming from the
eastern tropics (the product of the palm _Raphia Ruffia_), but it is
so cheap that it will probably supersede even bass-bark. It is strong
and pliable, and is an excellent material for tying up plants in the
greenhouse, or small ones out-doors. The greatest disadvantage in its
use in the budding field is its habit of rolling when it becomes dry.

[Illustration: Fig. 64. Bud entering matrix.]

In two or three weeks after the bud is set it will have "stuck" or
united to the stock. The bandage must then be removed or cut. It is
the common practice to draw a budding-knife over the strings, on the
side opposite the bud, completely severing them and allowing them
to fall off as they will. If the strings are left on too long they
will constrict the stem and often kill the bud, and they also have a
tendency to cause the bud to "break" or begin to grow. The bud should
remain perfectly dormant until spring, for if it should begin to grow
it will be injured and perhaps killed by the winter. It should remain
green and fresh; if it shrivels and becomes brown, even though it
still adheres to the stock, it is worthless. Advantage can be taken,
when cutting the tyings, to rebud any stocks which have failed. If
the bud should begin to grow, because of a warm and wet fall or other
reasons, there is little remedy except perhaps to head the shoot back
if it should become long enough. If the stocks are protected by snow
during winter, some of the buds at the base of the shoot may pass the
cold in safety.

[Illustration: Fig. 65. The bud tied.]

The next spring the stock should be cut off just above the bud (Fig.
66), in order to throw the entire force of the plant into the bud. If
the root is strong and the soil good, the bud will grow two or three
feet the first year; or peaches and cherries will grow from two to
three times that height. All sprouts should be kept rubbed off the
stock, and the bud should be trained to a single stem. In some weak and
crooked growers, the new shoot must be tied, and some propagators in
such cases cut off the stock five or six inches above the bud and let
it serve as a stake to which to tie. The stock, of course, must not be
allowed to grow. Late in the season the stock is cut down close to the
bud, as in Fig. 66. Peaches and some other fruits are sold after having
made one season's growth from the bud, but pears, apples, and most
other trees are not often sold until the second or third year.

"June budding" is a term applied to the budding of stocks in early
summer while they are yet growing rapidly. It is employed mostly at
the south where the stocks can be grown to sufficient size by the last
of June or first of July. Small stocks are usually employed--those
ranging from one-fourth to one-third inch being preferred. A few strong
leaves should be left on the stock below the bud, and after the bud has
"stuck" the whole top should not be cut off at once, else the growing
plant will receive a too severe check. It is best to bend the top over
to check its growth or remove the leaves gradually. The bandages should
not be left on longer than six to ten days if the stock is growing
rapidly. To prevent the constriction of the stem, muslin bands are
sometimes used instead of bass or raffia. In hot and dry climates the
bud should be set an inch or two higher in June budding than in the
ordinary practice, to escape the great heat of the soil. June budding
is used upon the peach more than any other tree, although it can be
employed for any species which will give large enough stocks from seed
by the June following the sowing. In peaches, the bud will produce a
shoot from three to five feet high the same season the buds are set,
so that marketable budded trees can be produced in one season from the
seed.

[Illustration: Fig. 66. Cutting off the stock.]

A different kind of early summer budding is sometimes performed upon
apples and other fruit-trees. In this case the stocks are one or two
years old from the transplanting, and dormant buds are used. These
buds are cut the previous fall or winter in the same manner as cions,
and when spring approaches they are put on ice--in sawdust, sand or
moss--and kept until the stocks are large enough to receive them. The
particular advantage of this method is the distributing of the labor
of budding over a longer season, thereby avoiding the rush which often
occurs at the regular budding time.

Budders usually carry a number of "sticks" with them when they enter
the nursery. These may be carried in the pocket, or thrust into the
boot-leg; or some budders carry four or five sticks in the hand. The
budder follows a row throughout its length, passing over those trees
which are too small to work. It is a common practice to rest upon one
knee while budding, as shown in Fig. 67, but some prefer to use a low
stool. The tying is usually done by a boy, who should follow close
behind the budder in order that the buds shall not dry out. An expert
budder will set from 1,000 to 3,000 buds a day, in good stock, and with
a boy (or two of them for the latter speed) to tie. Peach stocks are
more rapidly budded than most others, as the bark is firm and slips
easily, and some remarkable records are made by skillful workmen.

[Illustration: Fig. 67. Budder at work.]

Budding is sometimes employed the same as top-grafting for changing
over the top of an old tree from one variety to another. The buds
cannot be easily inserted in very old and stiff bark, but in all smooth
and fresh bark they work readily. Sometimes old trees are severely
pruned the year before the budding is to be done, in order to obtain
young shoots in which to set the buds. In fruit-trees six or seven
years old or less, budding is fully as advantageous as grafting. New
varieties are also budded into old branches in order to hasten bearing
for the purpose of testing the variety. Here budding has a distinct
advantage over grafting, as it uses fewer buds, and the wood of new
sorts is often scarce.

Flute-Budding.--An occasional method of budding is that known under the
general name of flute-budding. In this method the bud is not covered by
the bark of the stock as in shield-budding. Fig. 68 illustrates it. A
portion of bark is removed entirely from the stock, and a similar piece
is fitted into its place. When the wound extends only part way about
the stem, as in the illustration, the operation is sometimes known as
veneer-budding. When it extends entirely around the stem it is called
ring or annular-budding. Flute-budding is usually performed late in
spring. It is best adapted to plants with very thick and heavy bark.
The bud is tied and afterwards treated in essentially the same manner
as in shield-budding.

[Illustration: Fig. 68. Flute-budding.]

A species of flute-budding in which a ring of bark is slipped down upon
the tip of a shoot, which has been girdled for the purpose, is called
whistle-budding or tubular-budding.

_Grafting._--Grafting is divided in various ways, but chiefly with
reference to the position of the union upon the plant and to the method
in which the scion and stock are joined. In reference to position,
there are four general classes: 1. Root-grafting, in which the stock is
entirely a root. 2. Crown-grafting, which is performed upon the crown
or collar of the plant just at the surface of the ground, an operation
which is often confounded with root-grafting. 3. Stem-grafting, in
which the cion is set on the trunk or body of the tree below the limbs,
a method occasionally employed with young trees. 4. Top-grafting, or
grafting in the branches of the tree. Any method of inserting the cion
may be employed in these classes. The best classification, particularly
for purposes of description, is that which considers methods of making
the union. Some of these kinds of grafting are catalogued on page 66.
For our purposes, we shall need to consider only the whip, saddle,
splice, veneer, cleft and bark-grafting.

Whip-Grafting.--Whip or tongue-grafting is employed only on small
stocks, usually upon those one or two years old. Both the cion and
stock are cut across diagonally, the cut surface extending from one
to two inches according to the size of the part. A vertical cleft is
then made in both, and the two are joined by shoving the tongue of
the cion into the cleft of the stock. The operation can be understood
by reference to Figs. 69, 70 and 71. Fig. 69 shows the end of a cion,
cut natural size. The stock is cut in the same manner, and the two
are joined in Figs. 70 and 71. The parts are held firmly by a bandage
passed five or six times around them. If the graft is to stand above
ground, the wound must be protected by applying wax over the bandage.
(Recipes for wax can be found at the end of this chapter.)

[Illustration: Fig. 69. Whip-graft.]

[Illustration: Fig. 70. Whip-graft in position.]

Root-grafting, especially of fruit-stocks, is performed almost entirely
by the whip-graft. This operation is performed in winter. The stocks,
either one or two years old, are dug and stored in the fall. In January
or February the grafting is begun. In true root-grafting, only pieces
of roots are used, but some prefer to use the whole root and graft at
the crown. In piece-root-grafting, from two to four trees are made from
a single root. A piece of root from two to four inches long is used,
as shown in Fig. 71. The parts are usually held by winding with waxed
string or waxed bands. The string should be strong enough to hold the
parts securely and yet weak enough to be broken without hurting the
hands. No. 18 knitting cotton answers this purpose admirably. It should
be bought in balls, which are allowed to stand for a few minutes in
melted wax. The wax soon saturates the ball. Waxed bands are made by
spreading melted wax over thin muslin, which is cut into narrow strips
when dry. The string is the more useful for rapid work. The grafts are
packed away in sand, moss or sawdust in a cool cellar until spring,
when the two parts will be firmly callused together. Some propagators
are now discarding all tying of root-grafts. The grafts are packed away
snugly, and if the storage cellar is cool--not above 40°--they will
knit together so that they can be planted without danger of breaking
apart. If the cellar is warm the grafts will start into growth and be
lost.

Cions are cut in fall or winter, or any time before the buds swell in
spring. Only the previous year's growth is used in all ordinary cases,
but in maples and some other trees older wood may be used. In the
grafting of peaches--which is very rarely done--the best cions are
supposed to be those which bear a small portion of two-year-old at the
lower end. This portion of old wood probably serves no other purpose
than a mechanical one, as the recent wood is soft and pithy. It is a
common opinion that cions are worthless if cut during freezing weather,
but this is unfounded. The cions are stored in sand, moss or sawdust in
a cool cellar, or they may be buried in a sandy place. Or sometimes,
when a few are wanted for top-grafting, they are thrust into the ground
beside the tree into which they are to be set the following spring.
Only well-formed and mature buds should be used. Sometimes flower-buds
are inserted for the purpose of fruiting a new or rare variety the
following year.

[Illustration: Fig. 71. Root-graft.]

In common root-grafting in the east and south, the cion bears about
three buds, and the root is about the same length, or perhaps shorter.
The variable and unknown character of these roots as regards hardiness,
renders it important in very severe climates that roots should be
obtained from the same plant as the cion, the hardiness of which is
known. It is, therefore, the practice in the prairie countries to use
a very long cion--eight inches to a foot--and to set it in the ground
to the top bud. The piece of root serves as a temporary support, and
roots are emitted along the cion. When the tree is ready for sale the
old piece of root is often removed, or sometimes it falls away of
itself. In this manner own-rooted trees are obtained, and it is for
this reason that root-grafting is more universally practiced west of
the Great Lakes than budding. Even cions of ordinary length often emit
roots, as seen in Fig. 72, but the cions are not long enough to reach
into uniformly moist soil. Some varieties of fruit-trees are found in
practice to root more readily than others.

[Illustration: Fig. 72. Growing Root-graft.]

There is much discussion as to the relative merits of budding and
root-grafting fruit-stocks, but the observations are usually so
indefinite or irrelevant that safe conclusions cannot be drawn
from them. We have seen that root-grafting serves an indispensable
purpose in the cold prairie regions by enabling nurserymen to secure
own-rooted trees of known hardiness. Aside from this it may be said
that root-grafting is cheaper than budding, as it is performed when
labor is cheap and two or more trees are made from one stock, Budded or
crown-grafted trees possess a greater root and usually make a stronger
growth, at least the first year or two, and it has been said that their
roots are more numerous and more symmetrically disposed. But there is
not yet a sufficient knowledge of the subject in all its details to
allow of dogmatic expressions upon it.

Saddle-Grafting.--Saddle-grafting is a simple and useful method for the
shoots of small, growing plants. The stock is cut to a wedge-shaped
end by two cuts, and the cion is split and set upon the wedge (Fig.
73). The union is then tied and waxed in the same way as exposed
whip-grafts. It is oftenest employed when a terminal bud is used, as
the wood in such cions is usually too weak to work well with a tongue.

[Illustration: Fig. 73. Saddle-graft.]

[Illustration: Fig. 74. Splice-grafting.]

Splice-Grafting.--The simplest form of grafting is that shown in Fig.
74, in which the two parts are simply cut across diagonally and laid
together. The parts are held only by the string, which, together
with the wax, is applied in the same way as upon the whip-graft.
Splice-grafting is frequently used upon soft or tender wood which will
not admit of splitting. It is adapted only to small shoots.

Veneer-Grafting.--Fig. 75 shows a style of grafting which is much
used, particularly for ornamentals and for rare stocks which are grown
in pots. An incision is made upon the stock just through the bark
and about an inch long (_A_, Fig. 75), the bit of bark being removed
by means of a downward sloping cut at its base. The base of the cion
is cut off obliquely, and upon the longest side a portion of bark is
removed, corresponding to the portion taken from the stock. The little
tongue of bark on the stock covers the base of the cion, when it is
set. The cion is tied tightly to the stock (_B_, Fig. 75), usually
with raffia. This method of grafting makes no incision into the wood,
and all the wounded surfaces are completely covered by the matching
of the cion and stock. It is not necessary, therefore, to wax over
the wounds, as a rule. The parts grow together quickly and uniformly,
making a solid and perfect union as shown at _D_, Fig. 75. So far as
the union of the parts is concerned, this is probably the ideal method
of grafting. This method, which is nothing but the side-graft of the
English gardeners with the most important condition of the longer
tongue on the stock, is known by various names, but it is oftenest
called veneer-grafting in this country.

[Illustration: Fig. 75. Veneer-grafting.]

Veneer-grafting is employed mostly from November to March upon potted
plants. Stocks which are grown out-doors are potted in the early fall
and carried in a cool house or pit. The cion is applied an inch or two
above the surface of the soil, and the stock need not be headed back
until the cion has united. (See Fig. 76.) Both dormant and growing
cions are used. All plants in full sap must be placed under a frame in
the house, in which they can be almost entirely buried with sphagnum,
not too wet, and the house must be kept cool and rather moist until
the cions are well established. Some species can be transferred to the
open border or to nursery rows in the spring, but most plants which are
grafted in this way are handled in pots during the following season.
Rhododendrons, Japanese maples and many conifers are some of the plants
which are multiplied by veneer-grafting. This method, when used with
hardy or tender plants, gives a great advantage in much experimental
work, because the stock is not at all injured by a failure and can
be used over again many times, perhaps even in the same season; the
manipulation is simple and easily acquired by inexperienced hands.

Cleft-Grafting.--In cleft-grafting the stock is cut off squarely
and split, and into the split a cion with a wedge-shaped base is
inserted. It is particularly adapted to large stocks and is the method
universally employed for top-grafting old trees. Fig. 77 represents
the operation. The end of the stock, technically called a "stub,"
is usually large enough to accommodate two cions, one upon either
side. In fact, it is better to use two cions, not only because they
double the chances of success but because they hasten the healing of
the stub. Cleft-grafting is at best a harsh process, especially upon
large limbs, and its evils should be mitigated as much as possible. In
common practice, the cion (Fig. 78) contains three buds, the lowest
one standing just above the wedge portion. This lowest bud is usually
entirely covered with wax, but it pushes through without difficulty. In
fact, being nearest the source of food and most protected, its chances
of living are greater than those of the higher buds. The sides of the
cion must be cut smoothly and evenly. A single draw cut on each side
with a sharp blade is much better than two or three partial cuts. A
good grafter makes a cion by three strokes of the knife, one to cut off
the cion and two to shape it. The outer edge of the wedge should be a
little thicker than the inner one so that the stock will bind upon it
and hold it firm at the point where the union first takes place. These
cions are taken in late fall or winter, and kept in the same manner as
directed for whip-grafting on pages 77 and 78.

[Illustration: Fig. 76. Veneer-graft.]

[Illustration: Fig. 77. Cleft-grafting.]

The stock or stub must be cut off squarely and smoothly with a sharp
and preferably fine-toothed saw. If one desires to be especially
careful in the operation, the end of the stub, or at least two opposite
sides of it, may be dressed off with a knife so that the juncture
between the bark and the wood may be more easily seen. Professional
grafters rarely resort to this practice, however. The stub is then
split to the depth of an inch and a half or two inches. Various styles
of "grafting-knife" are used to split the stub. The best one is that
shown in Fig. 79. It is commonly made from an old file by a blacksmith.
The blade is curved so that the bark of the stub is drawn in when the
knife is entering, thereby lessening the danger of loosening the bark.
Upon the end of the knife is a wedge, about four or five inches long,
for opening the cleft. The wedge is driven into the cleft and allowed
to remain while the cions are being placed. If the cleft does not open
wide enough to allow the cions to enter, the operator bears down on the
handle of the knife. The cions must be thrust down to the first bud, or
even deeper, and it is imperative that they fit tightly. The line of
separation between the bark and wood in the cion should meet as nearly
as possible the similar line in the stock. The cions are usually set a
trifle obliquely, the tops projecting outwards, to ensure the contact
of the cambium layers. Writers usually state that it is imperative to
success to have the exact lines between the bark and wood meet for
at least the greater part of their length, but this is an error. The
callus or connecting tissue spreads beyond its former limits when the
wounds begin to heal. The most essential points are rather to be sure
that the cion fits tightly throughout its whole length, and to protect
the wound completely with an air-tight covering.

[Illustration: Fig. 78. Cleft-graft cion.]

The wounds must now be covered with wax. Fig. 80 illustrates a stub
after the covering has been applied. If the grafting is done in early
spring when the weather is cold, the wax will have to be applied with
a brush. The wax is melted in a glue-pot, which is carried into the
tree. But if the weather is warm enough to soften the wax, it should
be applied with the hands. The hands are first greased to prevent the
wax from sticking. The two side or vertical portions are applied first.
The end of the mass of wax in the hand is flattened into a thin portion
about a half inch wide. This portion is then laid over the bud and held
there by the thumb of the other hand, while the wax is drawn downwards
over the cleft, being pressed down firmly upon the bark by the thumb
of the first hand. The wax gradually tails out until it breaks off
just below the lowest point of the cleft. The flattened upper part is
then wrapped around the cion upon either side, completely and tightly
encircling it. A simple deft wrapping of the wax about the cion makes
a tighter joint than can be secured in twice the time by any method of
pinching it into place. Another portion of wax is now flattened and
applied over the end of the stub. Many grafters apply a bit of wax to
the tops of the cion also. All the wounds must be covered securely.

[Illustration: Fig. 79. A cleft grafting-knife.]

[Illustration: Fig. 80. A waxed stub.]

The top-grafting of large trees is an important operation, and there
are many men who make it a business. These men usually charge by the
stub and warrant, the warrant meaning that one cion of the stub must
be alive when the counting is done late in summer. From two to three
cents a stub is a common price. A good grafter in good "setting" can
graft from 400 to 800 stubs a day and wax them himself. Much depends
upon the size of the trees, their shape, and the amount of pruning
which must be done before the grafter can work in them handily. Every
man who owns an orchard of any extent should be able to do his own
grafting. The most important factor in the top-grafting of an old
tree is the shaping of the top. The old top is to be removed during
three or four or five years and a new one is to be grown in its
place. If the tree is old, the original plan or shape of the top will
have to be followed in its general outlines. The branches should be
grafted, as a rule, where they do not exceed an inch and a half in
diameter, as cions do better in such branches, the wounds heal quickly
and the injury to the tree is less than when very large stubs are
used. The operator should endeavor to cut all the leading stubs at
approximately equal distances from the center of the tree. And then, to
prevent the occurrence of long and pole-like branches, various minor
side-branches should be grafted. These will serve to fill out the new
top and to afford footholds for pruners and pickers. Fig. 81 is a good
illustration of an old apple tree just top-grafted. Many stubs should
be set, and at least all the prominent branches should be grafted if
the tree has been well-trained. It is better to have too many stubs
and to be obliged to cut out some of them in after years, than to have
too few. In thick-topped trees, care must be exercised not to cut out
so much the first year that the inner branches will sunburn. All large
branches which must be sacrificed ought to be cut out when the grafting
is done, as they increase in diameter very rapidly after so much of
the top is removed. One horizontal branch lying directly over or under
another should not be grafted, for it is the habit of grafts to grow
upright rather than horizontally in the direction of the branch. It is
well to split all stubs on such branches horizontally, that one cion
may not stand directly under another.

[Illustration: Fig. 81. Top-grafted old tree.]

Top-grafting is performed in spring. The best time is when the leaves
are pushing out, as wounds made then heal quickly and cions are most
apt to live. But when a large amount of grafting must be done, it is
necessary to begin a month or even two before the leaves start. On the
other hand, the operation can be extended until a month or more after
the leaves are full-grown, but such late cions make a short growth,
which is likely to perish the following winter. Professional grafters
usually divide their men into three gangs, one to do the cutting of
the stubs, one to set the cions, and one to apply the wax. The cions
are all whittled before the grafter enters the tree. They are then
usually moistened by dipping into a pail of water and are carried in a
high side-pocket in the jacket. The handiest mallet is a simple club
or billy, a foot and a half long, hung over the wrist by a loose soft
cord (Fig 82). This is brought into the palm of the hand by a swinging
motion of the forearm. This mallet is always in place, never drops
from the tree, and is not in the way. The knife shown in Fig. 79 is
commonly used. A downward stroke of the mallet drives the knife into
the tree and an upward motion immediately following strikes the knife
on the outer end and removes it. Another downward motion drives in the
wedge. The sharpened nails and sticks commonly pictured as wedges in
cleft-grafting are useless for any serious work. And the common style
of grafting-knife sold by seedsmen, comprising a thin, broad blade set
in a heavy back piece, is also worthless. The blade is too thin to
split the stub. The various combined implements which have been devised
to facilitate cleft-grafting are usually impracticable in serious
operations. A very good grafting-knife for small stocks or trees in
nursery row is shown in Fig. 83. This is the Thomas knife. The larger
arm is made entirely of wood. At its upper end is a grooved portion
into which the blade closes. This blade can be made from the blade of a
steel case-knife, and it should be about two and a half inches long. It
is secured to an iron handle. The essential feature of this implement
is the draw cut which is secured by setting the blades and the pivot
in just the positions shown in the figure. The stock is cut off by the
shears, and the cleft is then made by turning the shears up and making
a vertical cut. The cleft is therefore cut instead of split, insuring a
tight fit of the cions. This tool is particularly useful upon hard and
crooked-grained stocks.

[Illustration: Fig. 82. Grafting-mallet.]

Cleft-grafting is often employed for other purposes than the
top-grafting of old trees. It is in common use on soft and fleshy
stocks, as cactuses, and various fleshy roots. Fig. 84 shows a
cleft-graft on cactus. The cion is held in place with a pin or cactus
spine, and it is then bound with raffia or other cord. Waxing is
not necessary. Fig. 85 illustrates a cleft root-graft of peony. The
cleft in the thick root is cut with a knife, and the stock is bound
up securely, usually with wire, as cord, unless waxed, rots off too
quickly. Wax is not used, as the graft is buried to the top bud. The
peony is grafted in summer. Dahlias are often grafted after the same
fashion, although some operators prefer, in such fleshy subjects, to
cut out a section from the side of the stock to receive the cion,
rather than to make a cleft. Hollyhocks, ipomœas, gloxinias and other
thick-rooted plants may be similarly treated.

Bark-grafting.--A style of grafting suited to large trees is shown in
Fig. 86. The stock is not cleft, but the cions are pushed down between
the bark and wood.

[Illustration: Fig. 83. Thomas' grafting-knife.]

[Illustration: Fig. 84. Cleft-graft of cactus.]

The cion must be cut very thin so that they will not break the bark
on the stock. Fig. 87 represents a good style of cion. It is cut to
a shoulder upon either side. Several cions can be placed in a single
stub, and as no splitting is necessary, it is a useful method for very
large limbs. It is especially useful in repairing trees when very
large branches are broken off. A dozen or more cions may be set about
the broken portion, after it is dressed off, and a few of them may
be allowed to remain after the wound has been healed. Bark-grafting
can be performed to advantage only when the bark peels readily. The
cions should be held in place by a tight bandage, as seen in Fig. 86,
and then wax should be applied in essentially the same manner as for
cleft-grafting. (See Fig. 80.) This is sometimes called crown-grafting,
and is useful under certain conditions.

A special form of bark-grafting is sometimes employed for covering
girdles about the base of an old tree, made by mice, gophers or
rabbits. The edges of the bark are trimmed, and cions are cut a couple
inches longer than the width of the girdle. These are sharpened at
both ends. One end is inserted under the bark below the girdle and the
other above it. The cions are placed close together entirely around the
tree. This operation is said to be necessary to keep up the connection
between the root and the top, but this is in most cases an error. A
good dressing of cow-dung, wax or clay, held on with stout bandages, is
much better than the grafting. This method of grafting is sometimes,
but erroneously, called inarching. A complete girdle made during the
spring or early summer will usually heal over readily if it is well
bandaged; and in some cases even the bandage is not necessary.

[Illustration: Fig. 85. Peony root-graft.]

Herbaceous-grafting.--In the preceding pages, the discussions have had
to do with cions which are dormant or at least well-hardened, and with
stocks which contain more or less hard woody substance. But herbaceous
shoots can be grafted with ease. All such plants as geraniums,
begonias, coleuses and chrysanthemums can be made to bear two or more
varieties upon the same individual. Almost any style of grafting can be
employed, but the veneer, cleft and saddle-grafts are preferred. Shoots
should be chosen for stocks which are rather firm, or in the condition
for making good cuttings. The cions should be in a similar condition,
and they may be taken from the tips of branches or made of a section
of a branch. The union should be bound snugly with raffia, and the
plant set in a propagating frame, where it must be kept close for a few
days. It is not necessary, in most cases, to use wax, and upon some
tender stocks the wax is injurious. Moss may be bound about the graft,
but unless the union is first thoroughly covered by the bandage, roots
will start into the moss and the parts will fail to unite. The growing
shoots of shrubs and trees can also be grafted, but the operation is
rarely employed. In various coniferous trees (as pines and spruces) the
young shoots are sometimes cleft or saddle-grafted in May, the parts
being well bandaged with waxed muslin or raffia, and shaded with paper
bags. The walnut and some other trees which do not work readily are
sometimes treated in this manner.

[Illustration: Fig. 86. Bark-grafting.]

A little known species of herbaceous-grafting is the joining of parts
of fruits. It is easily performed upon all fleshy fruits like tomatoes,
apples, squashes and cucumbers. When the fruit is half or more grown,
one-half is cut away and a similar half from another fruit is applied.
Better results follow if the severed side of the parent or stock fruit
is hollowed out a little, so as to let the foreign piece set into
the cavity. The edges of the epidermis of the stock are then tied up
closely against the cion by means of bass or raffia. The two parts are
securely tied together, but no wax is required. This operation succeeds
best under glass, where conditions are uniform and winds do not blow
the fruits about.

Even leaves may be used as stocks or cions. Any such succulent and
permanent leaves as those of the house-leeks, crassula, and the like
may have young shoots worked upon them, and leaves which are used as
cuttings can often be made to grow on other plants.

Seed-grafting.--A novel kind of grafting has been described in France
by Pieron, which consists in using a seed as a cion. This has been
used upon the grape. A seed is dropped into a gimlet-hole made near
the base of the vine while the sap is flowing in the spring. The seed
germinates, and after a time the plantlet unites with the stock.

[Illustration: Fig. 87. Cion for bark-grafting]

Double-grafting.--Grafting upon a grafted tree is known as
double-grafting or double-working. It is employed for the purpose of
growing a variety upon an uncongenial root or of securing a straight
and vigorous stock for a weak and poor grower. Some sorts of pears do
not unite well with the quince, and if it is desired to secure dwarfs
of these varieties, some variety which unites readily with the quince
must first be put upon it. The Angouleme takes well to the quince, and
upon Angouleme dwarfs the Seckel and some other varieties are often
worked. The last cion is usually set after the first one has grown one
season, although both may be set at the same time. Double-grafting
for the purpose of securing a better growth is often practiced. The
Canada Red apple, for instance, is such a poor grower that it is often
stem-worked or top-worked upon the Northern Spy or some other strong
stock. The Winter Nelis and the Josephine de Malines pears are often
double-worked for the same reason.

Cutting-grafting.--Cuttage and graftage are combined in various ways.
Cuttings of plants which root with difficulty are sometimes grafted
upon those which root easily. When the plants are transplanted, the
following autumn or spring, the nurse or stock can be removed, the
cion having taken root. Root-grafting with a long cion, described on
a previous page (78), is virtually a grafting of cuttings. In other
cases, union with an uncongenial stock is facilitated by allowing the
cion to project downwards beyond the point of union and to stand in
the soil or moss or a dish of water. Fig. 88 is a good illustration
of the practice. The cion extends into the soil nearly as far as the
root itself. After union has taken place, the lower part of the cion
is removed. This method can be used for some magnolias, mulberries,
birches, and many other plants of which some kinds root with more or
less difficulty. Bottle-grafting, described in most of the books, is
essentially this method, modified by letting the end of the cion drop
into a bottle of water. Sometimes a portion of the bandage is allowed
to hang in water, to keep the cion fresh until the parts join.

[Illustration: Fig. 88. Cutting-grafting.]

=Inarching.=--Inarching or grafting by approach is the process of
grafting contiguous plants or branches while the parts are both
attached to their own roots. When the parts are united, one of them is
severed from its root. Fig. 89 explains the operation. In this case,
the larger plant is designed for the stock. When the smaller plant has
united, it is cut off just below the union and it thenceforth grows
upon the other plant. Limbs of contiguous trees are sometimes grafted
in this way. It is the process employed by nature in what is called
natural grafting. Grape-vines are often inarched. A thrifty young
branch may be inarched into the stem of a fruit upon the same tree,
thus supplying the fruit with additional food and causing it to grow
larger than it might if undisturbed.

To join the parts, it is only necessary to remove the barks between
the stock and cion and then tie the two together snugly. If out-doors,
the junction should be waxed over; and it is then necessary, also, to
secure the branches in such manner that the wind cannot loosen them.
The parts are sometimes joined by a tongue, after the manner of a
whip-graft, but this is rarely necessary. Oranges and camelias were
often propagated by inarching in the old practice, but this work is now
much more easily done by the veneer-graft.

=Grafting-waxes.=--There are great numbers of recipes for waxes or
mastics for protecting grafts and covering wounds upon trees. In this
country the resin and beeswax waxes are most used, although some of the
alcoholic waxes are popular in some regions. In Europe, many clay and
pitch waxes are in common use. For most purposes, the wax No. 1 in the
following list will be found one of the best, especially for applying
by the hand. In making the resin and beeswax waxes, the materials are
first broken up finely and melted together. When thoroughly melted,
the liquid is poured into a pail or tub of cold water. It soon becomes
hard enough to handle, and it is then pulled and worked over until it
becomes tough or "gets a grain," at which stage it becomes the color
of very light-colored manilla paper. When wax is applied by hand, the
hands must be well greased. Hard tallow is the best material for this
purpose. In top-grafting large trees it is well to carry a supply of
tallow when waxing by smearing the backs of the hands before entering
the tree.

[Illustration: Fig. 89. Inarching.]

_1. Common Resin and Beeswax Waxes._

     1. Resin, 4 parts by weight; beeswax, 2 parts; tallow, 1 part.

     2. Resin, 4 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb.; tallow, 1 lb.

     3. Resin, 6 lbs.; beeswax, 2 lbs.; linseed oil, 1 pt.

     4. Resin, 6 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb.; linseed oil, 1 pt.; apply hot
        with a brush, one-eighth of an inch thick over all the joints.

     5. Resin, 4 lbs.; beeswax, 1 lb.; and from half to a pint
        of raw linseed oil; melt all together gradually, and turn into
        water and pull. The linseed oil should be entirely free from
        cotton-seed oil. For use in warm weather.

     6. Resin, 6 parts; beeswax, 1 part; tallow, 1 part. To be
        used warm, in the house.

     7. Resin, 4 or 5 parts; beeswax, 1-1/2 to 2 parts; linseed oil,
        1 to 1-1/2 parts. For out-door work.


_2. Alcoholic Waxes._

     8. Lefort's Liquid Grafting Wax, or Alcoholic Plastic.--Best
        white resin, 1 lb.; beef tallow, 1 oz.; remove from the fire
        and add 8 ozs. of alcohol. Keep in closed bottles or cans.

     9. Alcoholic Plastic with Beeswax.--Melt 6 parts white resin
        with 1 part beeswax; remove from stove and partially cool by
        stirring, then add gradually--with continued stirring--enough
        alcohol to make the mixture, when cool, of the consistency of
        porridge. In the temperature of the grafting-room it will
        remain sufficiently plastic to permit applying to the cut
        surfaces with the finger.

    10. Alcoholic Plastic with Turpentine.--Best white resin,
        1 lb.; beef tallow, 1 oz.; turpentine, 1 teaspoonful; add enough
        alcohol (13 to 15 fluid ozs. of 95 per cent. alcohol) to make the
        wax of the consistency of honey. Or, less alcohol may be
        added if the wax is to be used with the fingers.


_3. French and Pitch Waxes._

    11. Common French.--Pitch, 1/2 lb.; beeswax, 1/2 lb.; cow-dung,
        1 lb. Boil together, melt and apply with a brush.

    12. Common French Bandage Wax.--Equal parts of beeswax,
        turpentine and resin. While warm spread on strips of
        coarse cotton or strong paper.

    13. Grafting Clay.--1/3 cow-dung, free from straw, and 2/3
        clay, or clayey loam, with a little hair, like that used in plaster,
        to prevent its cracking. Beat and temper it for two or three
        days until it is thoroughly incorporated. When used it should
        be of such a consistency as to be easily put on and shaped with
        the hands.

    14. Resin, 2 lbs. 12 ozs.; Burgundy pitch, 1 lb. 11 ozs. At
        the same time, melt 9 ozs. of tallow; pour the latter into the
        former, while both are hot, and stir the mixture thoroughly.
        Then add 18 ozs. of red ochre, dropping it in gradually and stirring
        the mixture at the same time.

    15. Black pitch, 28 parts; Burgundy pitch, 28 parts; beeswax,
        16 parts; grease, 14 parts; yellow ochre, 14 parts.

    16. Black pitch, 28 lbs.; Burgundy pitch, 28 lbs.; yellow
        wax, 16 lbs.; suet or tallow, 14 lbs.; sifted ashes, 14 lbs.
        When used, warm sufficiently to make it liquid, without being
        so hot as to injure the texture of the branches.

    17. Melt together 1-1/4 lb. of clear resin and 3/4 lb. of white
        pitch. At the same time melt 1/4 lb. of tallow. Pour the
        melted tallow into the first mixture, and stir vigorously. Then
        before the stuff cools add, slowly stirring meantime, 1/2 lb.
        of Venetian red. This may be used warm or cold.


_4. Waxed String and Bandage._

    18. Waxed String for Root-grafting.--Into a kettle of melted
        wax place balls of No. 18 knitting cotton. Turn the balls
        frequently, and in five minutes they will be thoroughly saturated,
        when they are dried and put away for future use. This material
        is strong enough, and at the same time breaks so easily as not to
        injure the hands. Any of the resin and beeswax waxes may be
        used. When the string is used, it should be warm enough to
        stick without tying.

    19. Waxed Cloth.--Old calico or thin muslin is rolled on
        a stick and placed in melted wax. When saturated it is allowed
        to cool by being unrolled on a bench. It is then cut in strips
        to suit. Or the wax may be spread upon the cloth with a brush.


_5. Waxes for Wounds._

    20. Any of the more adhesive grafting waxes are excellent for
        dressing wounds, although most of them cleave off after the
        first year. Stiff and ochreous paints are also good.

    21. Coal-tar.--Apply a coating of coal-tar to the wound, which
        has first been pared and smoothed. If the wound contains a
        hole, plug it with seasoned wood.

    22. Hoskins' Wax.--Boil pine tar slowly for three or four
        hours; add 1/2 lb. of beeswax to a quart of the tar. Have
        ready some dry and finely sifted clay, and when the mixture of
        tar and wax is partially cold, stir into the above named quantity
        about 12 ozs. of the clay; continue the stirring until the mixture
        is so stiff, and so nearly cool, that the clay will not settle. This
        is soft enough in mild weather to be easily applied with a knife
        or spatula.

    23. Schæfell's Healing Paint.--Boil linseed oil (free from
        cotton-seed oil) one hour, with an oz. of litharge to each pt. of
        oil; then stir in sifted wood ashes until the paint is of the
        proper consistency. Pare the bark until smooth. Paint the
        wound over in dry weather, and if the wound is very large, cover
        with a gunny-sack.

    24. Tar for Bleeding in Vines.--Add to tar about 3 or 4
        times its weight of powdered slate or some similar substance.
        Apply with an old knife or flat stick.

    25. Hot Iron for Bleeding in Vines.--Apply a hot iron to the
        bare surface until it is charred, and then rub into the charred
        surface a paste made of newly-burnt lime and grease.

    26. Collodion for Bleeding in Vines.--It may be applied with
        a feather or small brush. In some extreme cases two or three
        coats will be needed, in which case allow the collodion to form
        a film before applying another coat. Pharmaceutical collodion
        is better than photographic.




CHAPTER VI.

THE NURSERY LIST.


  =Aaron's Beard.= See Hypericum.

  =Aaron's Rod.= See Verbascum.

  =Abelia.= _Caprifoliaceæ._

    In spring by layers under a frame, and in summer by
    cuttings.

  =Abies= (Fir, Spruce). _Coniferæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which are usually kept dry over
    winter and sown in spring in frames or in protected borders.
    Cones should be fully matured before being gathered. If
    they hold the seeds tightly they should be placed in a dry
    place, sometimes even in an oven, until the scales spread.
    In order to obtain stocky plants, the seedlings should be
    transplanted the following spring. The named varieties and
    the species which do not produce sufficient seed are winter-worked
    upon seedling stocks which are potted from the seed-beds
    in the fall. One-year-old stocks are commonly used,
    but in some cases the requisite size is not reached until the
    second year. Any of the common operations of grafting
    may be employed. The conifers are not difficult to graft.
    The European silver fir (_Abies pectinata_) may be used as a
    stock, but the common Norway spruce is now the most
    popular stock for species of both Abies and Picea.

  =Abobra.= _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or rarely by soft cuttings.

  =Abroma.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    By seeds sown in March. By cuttings made in spring
    from half-ripened wood, and placed under a bell-glass.

  =Abronia= (Sand Verbena). _Nyctaginaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in autumn or spring, after the
    outer skin has been peeled off. Sow in pots of sandy soil,
    and keep in a frame until the following spring; then place in
    their flowering quarters. By young cuttings, set in spring,
    in sandy soil.

  =Abrus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds raised in heat or by cuttings under
    a hand-glass, in sand.

  =Abuta.= _Menispermaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings planted in a pot of sand, with a
    hand-glass placed over them, in heat.

  =Abutilon.= _Malvaceæ._

    Sow seeds in pans, with same soil and temperature as for
    cuttings. By cuttings from young wood, at almost any
    season; the best time, however, is spring or fall. Insert
    in pots, in a compost of equal parts peat, leaf-mould, loam
    and sand, and place in a temperature of 65° to 75°.

  =Acacia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagate by seeds sown as soon as ripe, in sandy peat;
    about one-fourth inch deep, or a little more for large
    seeds. Soak in hot water 24 hours if seeds are not fresh.
    Keep temperature about 55° or 60° and pot off when large
    enough to handle. By cuttings of the half-ripened wood,
    put in with a heel, in equal parts peat and sand, covered
    with pure sand. Insert the cuttings as soon as made; water,
    and leave them in the shade till dry. Place under a bell-glass,
    shade and water to prevent flagging. Pot off when
    rooted and keep in a close pit or house until the plants are
    thoroughly established. _A. pubescens_ and some others strike
    readily from root-cuttings.

  =Acæna.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions, creeping rootlets and
    cuttings.

  =Acalypha.= _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in sandy soil under a glass, in stove
    heat, during late winter or in spring.

  =Acanthephippium.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by dividing the pseudo-bulbs as soon as
    growth commences. (See under Orchids.)

  =Acantholimon.= _Plantagineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown carefully on a warm but rather
    shaded border; by very carefully made divisions; and by
    cuttings made in late summer and placed in frames to remain
    during the winter.

  =Acanthophœnix.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown in a moist bottom heat, in
    a well decomposed compost of one part loam, one of peat,
    one of leaf-mould, and one of sand.

  =Acanthorhiza.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds in a moist hot-bed in spring.

  =Acanthostachyum.= _Bromeliaceæ._

     Propagated by suckers, which strike readily in bottom
    heat.

  =Acanthus= (Bear's Breech). _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in gentle heat, or by division of
    the root in autumn or early spring. Also by root-cuttings.
    Water carefully.

  =Acer= (Maple). _Sapindaceæ._

    Stocks are grown from stratified seeds, which should be
    sown an inch or two deep. Some species, as _A. dasycarpum_,
    come readily if seeds are simply sown as soon as ripe.
    Varieties are often layered, but better plants are obtained by
    grafting. The Japanese sorts are winter-worked on imported
    _A. polymorphum_ stocks, either by whip or veneer grafting.
    Varieties of native species are worked upon common native
    stocks. Maples can also be budded in summer, and they
    grow from cuttings of soft and ripe wood.

  =Aceras.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by carefully made divisions of the tubers.
    (See under Orchids.)

  =Aceratium.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by ripe cuttings, which root readily in sand,
    in heat, under a hand-glass.

  =Achania.= See Malvaviscus.

  =Achillea.= Including Ptarmica (Milfoil), _Compositæ_.

    Propagated by seeds, root divisions and cuttings, during
    spring.

  =Achimenes=, including Scheeria. _Gesneraceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, carefully sown in well-drained pans,
    which are filled nearly to the rim, levelled, and well watered
    with a fine rose. Sow seed and cover lightly with sand, and
    place in shady position. Keep moist and apply water very
    lightly. Place a sheet of glass over the seed-pan. After
    large enough to be pricked off, treat like rooted cuttings.
    The best time for all modes of grafting is early spring. By
    scales from the corms, carefully rubbed off and sown like
    seeds, in pots or pans of the same compost, barely covered
    with sand, and placed in bottom heat. By leaves, severed
    from the stems, and pricked into pots of similar soil to the
    cuttings, placing all the petiole below the surface, and placed
    in bottom heat. By cuttings from any portion of the stem;
    insert in a soil of equal parts of peat and sand, in well-drained
    pots, and place in bottom heat.

  =Achras.= See Sapota.

  =Achyranthes.= See Iresine.

  =Achyronia.= See Priestleya.

  =Aciphylla.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Propagated in spring by seeds or divisions.

  =Acis.= See Leucoium.

  =Acisanthera.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root freely in a mixture of
    loam, sand and peat, in stove temperature.

  =Acmadenia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings pricked in a pot of very sandy soil,
    covered with a bell-glass.

  =Acmena.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Propagated by placing half-ripened cuttings in sand under
    a glass without heat.

  =Aconitum= (Aconite, Monk's Hood, Wolf's Bane). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds should be sown as soon as ripe in a cold-frame or
    border; also by division. Roots should not be left about,
    for they are very poisonous.

  =Acontias.= See Xanthosoma.

  =Acorns.= See Quercus.

  =Acorus.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated during spring by divisions.

  =Acradenia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings under a bell-glass.

  =Acridocarpus.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Propagated by imported seeds, and by cuttings in bottom
    heat.

  =Acrocomia.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by suckers.

  =Acronychia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Propagated in July by cuttings inserted in sand, under a
    bell-glass.

  =Acrophyllum.= _Cunoniaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of the half-ripened shoots which
    strike freely in a soil of sand and peat; cover with a hand-glass,
    and place in a cool house. The roots should be kept
    moist.

  =Acrostichum.= See Ferns.

  =Acrotriche.= _Epacridaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings made of young shoots, pricked in
    sand, covered with a bell-glass, and placed in a cool house;
    afterwards treated like Epacris.

  =Actæa= (Baneberry). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seed and by division of root during spring.

  =Actinella=, Picradenin. _Compositæ._

    Propagated in spring by divisions.

  =Actinidia.= _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, layers or cuttings. The cuttings
    should be put in sandy soil, in autumn, under a hand-light.

  =Actinocarpus.= _Alismaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions during spring.

  =Actinomeris=, Pterophyton. _Compositæ._

    Increased in spring, by seeds and division. Use a warm
    border, with or without hand-lights, or a cold-frame.

  =Actinophyllum.= See Sciadophyllum.

  =Actinotus.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown on a hotbed in spring, and in
    May the seedlings may be transplanted to the open border in
    a warm situation, where they will flower and seed freely.
    Divisions of the roots grow readily.

  =Acyntha.= See Sanseviera.

  =Ada.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by divisions as soon as the plant commences
    growth. (See under Orchids.)

  =Adamia.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Increased by seeds; by cuttings, which will root readily in
    a compost of loam, peat and sand, under a hand-glass.

  =Adamsia.= See Puschkinia.

  =Adam's Needle.= See Yucca.

  =Adenandra.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings made from the young tops, before
    they begin to throw out their buds, planted in a pot of sand,
    with a bell-glass or frame placed over them.

  =Adenanthera.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings taken off with a heel and planted in a
    pot of sand in heat, placing a bell-glass over them.

  =Adenanthos.= _Proteaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, in spring, placed in sandy soil,
    under a bell-glass, with gentle bottom heat.

  =Adenilenia.= See Neillia.

  =Adenium.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Increased by half-ripened cuttings, which strike root well
    in sand, under a hand-glass.

  =Adenocalymna.= _Bignoniaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which will root in sand, under a
    bell-glass, with bottom heat.

  =Adenocarpus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds may be sown in March, the hardy species out-doors,
    and the others in a cold house. Young cuttings root freely
    in sand, covered with a hand-glass.

  =Adenophora.= _Campanulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown as soon as ripe, in pots placed
    in cold-frames. Also by suckers.

  =Adenostoma.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the young shoots, placed in
    sand, under glass, in spring or autumn.

  =Adenotrichia.= See Senecio.

  =Adesmia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings should be placed in sand, covered by a
    hand-glass, in a gentle heat.

  =Adhatoda.= See Justicia.

  =Adiantum.= See Ferns.

  =Adike.= See Pilea.

  =Adina.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings placed in rich, loamy soil, under a
    hand-glass, in heat.

  =Adlumia= (Mountain Fringe). _Fumariaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds. The plant is a biennial, blooming
    the second season only.

  =Adonis.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds. The perennials may be divided at
    the root.

  =Ægiphila.= _Verbenaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which will root in sand, under a
    glass, with bottom heat.

  =Ægle= (Bengal Quince). _Rutaceæ._

    Propagated by ripe cuttings, which will root in sand under
    a hand-glass, in heat, if not deprived of any of their leaves.

  =Æolanthus.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased by seeds.

  =Æonium.= See Sempervivum.

  =Ærides.= _Orchideæ._

    The only method of propagating this genus is by removing
    the upper portion and planting it separately. It
    should always be severed low enough to include a few roots,
    otherwise a large proportion of leaves will be lost. A somewhat
    dense shade, a moist atmosphere and careful watering
    are essential until the young plant is established. The old
    stool will soon send out lateral growths, which, in time,
    may be separated and treated similarly. Vanda, Saccolabium,
    Angræcum, Renanthera are increased in the same
    way. (See under Orchids.)

  =Æschynanthus.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which are very unsatisfactory. By
    cuttings, which root freely in a well-drained pot, filled with
    a light compost, and having a surface of pure white sand,
    about one inch deep, during spring. The best are obtained
    from half-ripened wood, cut into two or three inch lengths,
    and all leaves, with the exception of one or two at the top,
    removed. Cover the cuttings with a bell-glass, and place in
    moderate bottom heat. When rooted, transfer singly to
    small pots, place under hand-glasses, until thoroughly established,
    then gradually harden off.

  =Æschynomene.= _Leguminosæ._

  Propagated seeds, those of the herbaceous species requiring a good
  heat to start them into growth. By cuttings, placed in sand under a
  bell-glass, in a brisk heat.

  =Æsculus= (Horse Chestnut, Buckeye). _Sapindaceæ._

    Propagated by stratified seeds sown in single rows in spring,
    and by layers made in the spring or fall; or by grafting or
    budding on the common horse chestnut or native buckeyes,
    usually under glass.

  =Æthionema.= _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in May, and by cuttings planted
    in summer.

  =Agalmyla.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Propagated by half-ripened cuttings, in heat under glass.

  =Aganisia.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by dividing the pseudo-bulbs just before starting
    into new growth. (See under Orchids.)

  =Aganosma.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in sand, under glass, with bottom
    heat.

  =Agapanthus= (African Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by offsets, or by divisions of the old plants in
    early spring.

  =Agapetes.= _Vacciniaceæ._

    Increased by young hardened cuttings, in sandy soil, under
    a hand-glass, in high temperature.

  =Agaricus.= See Mushroom.

  =Agastachys.= _Proteaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripened wood, in sandy soil
    under a glass, in a cool house.

  =Agathæa.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds and layers. Young cuttings root freely, in a gentle
    heat, at all times.

  =Agathomeris.= See Humea.

  =Agathosma= (Bucco, Dichosma). _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which, when young, root freely in
    a pot of sand, under a bell-glass, in a cool house. They
    require to be shaded somewhat in the summer.

  =Agathotes.= See Swertia.

  =Agati.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which will root in a pot of sand
    with a hand-glass over them, placed in heat.

  =Agave.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by seeds, to secure the production of which the
    flowers should be pollinated. Usually by suckers which
    spring naturally from the old plant.

  =Ageratum=, Cælestina. _Compositæ._

    Sow the seeds in January, in heat, in sandy soil. When
    large enough, prick them off into thumb pots, and keep in
    heat till they grow freely, then place them in a cooler house.
    Cuttings are commonly used for propagation.

  =Aglaia.= _Meliaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings ripened at the base, and taken off
    at a joint. They will root in sand under a hand-glass in
    heat.

  =Agrimonia.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by root-division.

  =Agrostemma= (Rose Campion). _Caryophylleæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by division.

  =Agrostis= (Bent Grass). _Gramineæ._

    Increased easily by seeds, sown in spring in the open
    border.

  =Ailanthus= (Tree of Heaven). _Xanthoxylaceæ._

    Propagated by suckers; and by pieces of the roots and
    planted in a pot with their points above the ground, and
    placed in a hot-bed. Also by stem-cuttings. Seeds are used
    when large quantities are desired.

  =Ainslæa.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by divisions of the root.

  =Aitonia.= _Meliaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which must not be put in very close
    together; they will root in sand, under a bell-glass, with bottom
    heat.

  =Aizoon.= _Portulacaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings.

  =Ajax.= See Narcissus.

  =Ajuga= (Bugle). _Labiatæ._

    Perennials propagated by seeds sown in the open border,
    during spring or autumn; by divisions. Annuals by seeds.

  =Akebia=, Rajania. _Berberideæ._

    Seeds. Layers of young or ripe wood. Dormant cuttings
    in bottom heat, and under glass in summer.

  =Alangium.= _Alangiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root readily if planted in a
    pot of sand, with a hand-glass over them, in heat.

  =Albuca.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by offsets (bulbels) from the old
    bulb.

  =Alcanna.= See Lawsonia.

  =Alchemilla= (Lady's Mantle). _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by divisions of the root.

  =Aldea.= See Phacelia.

  =Aletris.= See Tritonia

  =Aleurites.= _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagated by ripe cuttings in sand, under a hand-glass.
    Do not remove leaves.

  =Alexandrian Laurel.= See Ruscus.

  =Algaroba Bean.= See Ceratonia.

  =Alhagi= (Manna Tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in a hot-bed; and by cuttings
    rooted in sand, with a bell-glass over them, in heat.

  =Alibertia.= _Cinchonaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root freely in a mixture of
    loam and peat, under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Alisma=, Actinocarpus (Water Plantain). _Alismaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in a pot immersed
    in water and filled with loam, peat and sand; also by
    divisions, which root well in a moist loamy soil.

  =Allamanda.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Layers. Root-cuttings will root well at any time of the
    year in a bottom heat from 70° to 80.° The usual time is,
    however, in spring, when the old plants are pruned back.
    Choose the tops of the shoots, retaining two or three joints
    to each cutting. Place in a compost of sand, and peat or
    leaf-mould in equal proportions, singly, in pots, and plunge
    the pots in the propagating bed.

  =Allium=, including Porrum, Schœnoprasum. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown thinly in light soil in early spring.
    By bulbels, planting them in autumn or spring one to four
    inches deep. (See Onion.)

  =Allosorus.= See Ferns.

  =Almeidea.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by partly ripened cuttings, which will root in
    sand, under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Almond= (_Prunus communis_). _Rosaceæ._

    The almond is worked the same as the peach and apricot.
    Seedling almond stocks are best, but the peach is often
    used. Apricot stocks are sometimes employed, but they are
    not to be recommended.

  =Alnus= (Alder Tree). _Cupuliferæ._

    Propagated usually by seeds, which are gathered in the fall
    and well dried. Then they are sprinkled lightly on the
    ground and covered very thinly. Towards the end of the
    year the seedlings are planted in rows one and one-half feet
    apart, and six inches from each other, where they may
    remain for two years, after which they can be placed where
    they are intended to stand. Planting is best done in October
    or April. They are also increased, but rarely, by suckers,
    by cuttings and by grafting.

  =Alocasia.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions.

  =Aloe.= _Liliaceæ._

    Commonly propagated by suckers which spring from the
    base of the plant. Seeds are sometimes employed.

  =Alomia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by cuttings.

  =Alona.= _Nolanaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root freely in sandy loam,
    with a very gentle bottom heat.

  =Alonsoa.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown in spring; also by cuttings
    in sandy soil, in gentle heat. The herbaceous species may
    be treated as out-door summer annuals, and should be raised
    in little heat, and planted out in May.

  =Aloysia= (Sweet-scented Verbena, Lemon Verbena). _Verbenaceæ._

    Increased easily in spring by young wood. They will
    root in about three weeks, in sandy soil with gentle heat.
    Also by cuttings of ripened wood in autumn.

  =Alpinia.= _Zingiberaceæ._

    Increased by division after the young shoots have made an
    inch of growth in spring.

  =Alsodeia.= _Violarieæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which root readily under a bell-glass,
    if planted in sand, in heat.

  =Alsophila.= See Ferns.

  =Alstonia.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings rooted in sand, in heat.

  =Alstrœmeria.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by seeds. By a careful division of the fleshy
    roots, during fall or spring.

  =Alternanthera.= _Amarantaceæ._

    Commonly raised from cuttings of growing wood. For
    spring and summer bedding, the plants are started in late
    winter. The stock-plants, from which cuttings are taken,
    are procured from cuttings made late in summer. Seeds are
    little used.

  =Althæa= (Marsh-Mallow, Hollyhock). _Malvaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by divisions. The biennial species
    must be raised from seeds every year.

  =Alum Root.= See Heuchera.

  =Alyssum=, including Psilonema, Ptilotrichum, Schivereckia (Madwort).
    _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seed sown in the open border or in pans of
    sandy soil. By divisions. By layers. By cuttings made
    from young shoots two to three inches in length, placed in
    sandy loam, early in the season, in a shady place.

  =Amaranthus.= _Amarantaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in hot-beds in spring, and thinned
    out when about one-half inch high. About the end of May,
    they can be transplanted out-doors in their permanent situation,
    or into pots.

  =Amaryllis.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds and offsets. Seedlings will bloom in
    from one to two years.

  =Amber Tree.= See Anthospermum.

  =Amblyanthera.= See Mandevilla.

  =Ambrosinia.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by seeds sown as soon as ripe, in a cool house:
    and by divisions made just previous to new growth in spring.

  =Amelanchier.= _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds. Layers and cuttings in autumn. By grafting, in
    early spring, on the Mountain Ash, Hawthorn or the Quince,
    or the weaker on the stronger-growing species. See Juneberry.

  =Amellus.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by divisions; or by cuttings under glass in
    spring.

  =Amherstia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds; also by cuttings of the half-ripened
    wood inserted in sand under a glass, in bottom heat of
    about 80°.

  =Amianthemum.= See Zygadenus.

  =Amicia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which will root in sand under a
    hand-glass, in heat.

  =Ammodendron.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds and layers.

  =Ammyrsine.= See Leiophyllum.

  =Amomophyllum.= Spathiphyllum.

  =Amorpha= (Bastard Indigo). _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds, usually. Layers or cuttings, taken off
    at the joint, strike readily if placed in a sheltered situation
    early in autumn. They should remain undisturbed till the
    following autumn.

  =Amorphophallus.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated by offsets, or cormels, and by seeds, which,
    however, are usually sparingly produced in cultivation.

  =Ampelopsis=, Quinaria. _Ampelideæ._

    Increased by seeds, especially the one known as _A. Veitchii_.
    Layers or cuttings made in spring from the young soft wood,
    root freely in gentle heat. By cuttings having a good eye, if
    taken in September and pricked under hand-lights in sandy
    soil on the open border, or in pots. Hard wood cuttings are
    commonly employed in this country for _A. quinquefolia_.

  =Amphicarpæa.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown in the open
    border, in spring, in a sunny place.

  =Amphicome.= _Bignoniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in early spring, in pots of sandy
    soil placed in a greenhouse. By young shoots inserted in
    sandy soil in gentle heat in spring.

  =Amphilophium=, Amphilobium. _Bignoniaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings from young shoots, which root
    readily in sand, under a hand-glass, with bottom heat, during
    the spring months.

  =Amsonia.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds; by divisions of the roots in spring;
    or by cuttings during the summer months.

  =Amygdalus.= See Prunus.

  =Amyris.= _Burseraceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root readily in sand, under a
    hand-glass with bottom heat, during the spring months.

  =Anacampseros.= _Portulacaceæ._

    Increased by seeds; by cuttings and leaves, taken off close
    to the plant. These should be laid to dry a few days before
    planting.

  =Anacardium= (Cashew). _Anacardiaceæ._

    Ripened cuttings, with their leaves left on, root freely in
    sand under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Anagallis= (Pimpernel). _Primulaceæ._

    The annuals, by seeds sown in a warm place in spring;
    the perennials, by cuttings from young shoots, or by division,
    at any time, either under a hand-glass or in a closed
    frame. Keep in the shade, and when thoroughly established
    harden off gradually.

  =Anagyris.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which should be planted in July in
    a pot of sand, and placed under a hand-glass.

  =Anamenia.= See Knowltonia.

  =Ananas.= See Pine Apple.

  =Anantherix.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Increased by seeds, which ripen in abundance, or by division
    of the root.

  =Anarrhinum.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown outside in the spring, or by
    growing cutting, but they require protection during severe
    winters.

  =Anastatica.= _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in the spring in heat, and the
    plants afterwards potted off and plunged again in heat to
    hasten their growth.

  =Anchietea=, Lucinæa, Noisettia. _Violarieæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings, which root freely in sand,
    under a bell-glass, in a moderate heat.

  =Anchomanes.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated by seeds and offsets.

  =Anchusa.= _Boragineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown in early spring
    in pots of sandy soil; they will germinate in three or four
    weeks. Also by divisions, rarely by cuttings.

  =Andersonia.= _Epacrideæ._

    Propagated by cuttings from tips of young shoots. These
    should be made in autumn, winter or spring, and planted
    in sand in a gentle heat, with a bell-glass over them.

  =Andreusia.= See Myoporum.

  =Androcymbium.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and offsets.

  =Andromeda.= _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown thinly as soon as ripe, in pots
    or pans, in sandy peat soil. Place in a cool frame or greenhouse
    giving plenty of air. The young plants should be
    planted out in spring, if large enough, or pricked into boxes
    if small. By layers which, if carefully pegged down during
    September, will take twelve months to make sufficient roots
    to allow of their being separated; layerage is a common
    method.

  =Andropogon.= _Gramineæ._

    Increased by seeds or by division of the roots.

  =Androsace=, including Aretia. _Primulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown as soon as possible,
    and raised in a frame; also by divisions and cuttings.

  =Androsæmum.= See Hypericum.

  =Androstephium.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and offsets. The seeds should be
    sown as soon as ripe in a cold-frame.

  =Andryala.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions in spring.

  =Aneilema.= _Commelinaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and root divisions.

  =Anemia.= See Ferns.

  =Anemone= (Wind Flower). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, root divisions, or root-cuttings in
    autumn or early spring; the seeds are better sown as soon
    as ripe in pans, in a cold-frame.

  =Anemonopsis.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by divisions of the root-stock in
    spring.

  =Angelica.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in September
    or March in ordinary soil.

  =Angelonia=, Schelveria. _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds which should be planted in spring in
    hot-beds, and transplanted in the open in May. By cuttings
    of the young shoots in spring. These root readily
    under a hand-glass, or in a propagating bed if given plenty
    of air daily.

  =Angophora.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings, which will root in a few
    weeks in sandy soil under a hand-glass, in a cool house.

  =Angræcum.= See Ærides.

  =Anguloa.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by dividing the pseudo-bulbs, just before they
    commence to grow. (See under Orchids.)

  =Anigozanthus=, Schwægrichenia. _Hæmodoraceæ._

    Propagated by dividing the roots in spring.

  =Anisanthus.= See Antholyza.

  =Anise.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in ordinary soil, on a warm sunny
    border in May.

  =Anisochilus.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in February, in heat; or by cuttings,
    which will root in sandy soil under a bell-glass, in
    heat.

  =Anisomeles.= _Labiatæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which may be sown in spring, in
    heat. By cuttings made in spring and inserted in heat,
    under a bell-glass.

  =Anisopetalum.= See Bulbophyllum.

  =Anœctochilus.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by cutting off the growing top just below the
    last new root, dividing the remainder of the stem into lengths
    of two or three joints. (See under Orchids.)

  =Anoma.= See Moringa.

  =Anomatheca.= _Irideæ._

    Increased sometimes by seeds sown very thinly in seed
    pans as soon as ripe. Also multiply very rapidly by cutting
    up the masses once a year. Offsets.

  =Anona= (Custard Apple). _Anonaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in pots, and
    plunged into a hot-bed. By ripened cuttings, which will
    root in sand under a hand-glass, in a moist heat.

  =Anoplophytum.= See Tillandsia.

  =Anopterus.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by half-ripened cuttings, which root freely
    under a bell-glass in a cool house or frame in summer.

  =Ansellia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by divisions of the bulbs just after flowering.
    (See under Orchids.)

  =Antennaria.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown in spring in a cold-frame, and
    by divisions of the roots in spring.

  =Anthemis= (Camomile). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions.

  =Anthericum=, Phalangium. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown as early as possible after they
    are ripe, in a cold-frame; by division of the roots.

  =Anthocercis.= _Solanaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which strike freely in sand under a
    bell-glass, with a mild bottom heat.

  =Antholoma.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the ripened wood, which will
    strike root in sand, under a hand-glass.

  =Antholyza=, Petamenes, including Anisanthus. _Irideæ._

    Increased by seeds which should be sown as soon as ripe,
    in light soil, in a cool house. Here they will germinate the
    following spring, and will be fit to plant out in the summer
    of the same year. Also by offsets.

  =Anthospermum= (Amber Tree). _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, inserted in sand under a bell-glass.

  =Anthurium.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown as soon as ripe in shallow well-drained
    pans or pots filled with a compost of peat, loam,
    moss, broken crocks or charcoal and clean sand. Cover
    lightly and place in a close, moist propagating case, where a
    temperature of 75° to 85° is maintained; or the pots may be
    covered with bell-glasses. Keep the soil in a uniformly moist
    condition. Also increased by divisions, which should be
    made in January.

  =Anthyllis= (Kidney Vetch). _Leguminosæ._

    Herbaceous perennials increased by seeds or cuttings.
    The cuttings of most species will root in a pot of sandy soil,
    with a bell-glass over them, in a cool house or frame. Seed
    of the annuals should be sown in a warm dry place in the
    open ground.

  =Anticlea.= See Zygadenus.

  =Antirrhinum= (Snapdragon). _Scrophularineæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in early spring or mid-summer;
    by cuttings, which should be taken in September when they
    will readily root in a cold-frame, or under a hand-glass.

  =Aotus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds. In April or September by cuttings of
    half-ripened wood, inserted in sand under a bell-glass.

  =Apeiba.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by well-ripened cuttings planted in sand in
    heat, under a bell-glass, which should be tilted occasionally
    to give air.

  =Aphelandra.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings from half-ripened wood taken off
    with a heel. Cut the base of each clean across; insert an
    inch apart in pots of sandy soil, and plunge in a brisk bottom
    heat.

  =Aphelexis.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds. Also by cuttings made in spring or
    summer; small half-ripened side shoots are the best; and
    these will root in sandy soil, under a bell-glass, in a cool
    greenhouse.

  =Aphyllanthes.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown as soon as ripe
    in pots in a cool greenhouse. Divisions are also made.

  =Apios.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by the tubers or divisions of them.

  =Aplectrum= (Putty-Root). _Orchideæ._

    Increased by the bulb-like subterranean tubers; also by
    seeds. A difficult plant to grow.

  =Aplotaxis.= See Saussurea.

  =Apocynum= (Dog's Bane). _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, suckers and divisions. The best
    time to divide is just as the plants are starting into growth
    in spring.

  =Aponogeton.= _Naiadaceæ._

    Increased rapidly by seeds and offsets. The seeds should
    be sown as soon as ripe, in pots buried in loam, and covered
    with glass.

  =Apple= (_Pyrus Malus_). _Rosaceæ._

    Standard apple stocks are grown from seeds, and dwarf
    stocks from layers. Apple seeds are either imported from
    France or are obtained from pomace. The French seeds
    give what are technically known as _crab stocks_, the word _crab_
    being used in the sense of a wild or inferior apple. The
    yearling stocks themselves are imported from France in
    great numbers. It has been supposed that French crab
    stocks are hardier and more vigorous than ours, but this
    opinion is much less common than formerly, and the foreign
    stocks are not so popular now as the domestic stocks.

    The chief source of apple seeds at the present time is the
    pomace from cider mills. The "cheese" of pomace is
    broken up, and if the material is dry enough it may be run
    through a large sieve to remove the coarser parts. The
    seeds are then removed by washing. Various devices are in
    use for washing them out. They all proceed upon the fact
    that the pomace will rise in water and the seeds sink. Some
    use a tub or common tank, which is tilted a little to allow the
    water to flow over the side. Others employ boxes some
    seven or eight feet long, four feet wide and a foot deep, the
    lower end of which is only eleven inches deep to allow the
    escape of the water. This box is set upon benches, and a
    good stream of water is carried into it at the upper end. A
    bushel or two of pomace is emptied in at a time, and it is
    broken and stirred with a fork or shovel. When the seeds
    are liberated they fall to the bottom and the refuse runs
    over the lower end. Another box is provided with several
    cleats, at intervals of about a foot, and the ends are left
    open. The box is set at an angle, and the seeds are caught
    behind the cleats. Seeds must not stand long in the pomace
    pile, or they will be seriously injured. Nurserymen like to
    secure the pomace as soon as it is taken from the press.

    As soon as the seeds are collected, they should be spread
    upon tables or boards, and should be frequently turned
    until perfectly dry. They may then be stored in boxes in
    slightly damp sand or sawdust, or in powdered charcoal and
    kept in a cool and dry place until spring. Or if they are to
    be sown immediately they need not be dried, but simply
    mixed with enough dry sand to absorb the water so as to
    make them easy to handle Seeds should not be allowed to
    become hard and dry through long exposure to the air, or
    they will germinate unevenly. Apple seeds procured at the
    seed stores are often worthless because of this neglect. Very
    dry seeds can sometimes be grown, however, by subjecting
    them to repeated soakings and then sprouting in a gentle hot-bed
    or mild forcing-house. Change the water on the seeds
    every day, and at the end of a week or ten days mix with
    sand and place in a thin layer in the hot-bed. Stir frequently
    to prevent molding. When the seeds begin to sprout, sow
    them in the open ground. This operation, which is sometimes
    called _pipping_, may be performed in a small way by
    the kitchen stove. Seeds are sometimes "pipped" between
    moist blankets. (See also page 17.)

    When sowing is done in the fall, the seeds may be sown in
    the pomace. This entails extra labor in sowing, but it saves
    the labor of washing. This practice gives good results if
    the pomace is finely broken, and it is now common among
    nurserymen.

    In loose and well-drained soils, sowing is undoubtedly best
    performed in the fall, just as early as the seeds are ready.
    But upon land which holds much water, and which heaves
    with frost or contains much clay, spring sowing is preferable.
    In spring, the seeds should be sown just as soon as the ground
    can be worked.

    If the stocks are to be cultivated with a horse, the rows
    should be three or three and a half feet apart. Some growers
    sow in narrow drills and some in broad ones. The broad
    drills are usually six to ten inches wide. The earth is
    removed to the depth of two or three inches, if it is loose and
    in good condition, the seed is scattered thinly on the surface
    and the earth hoed back over them. If the ground is likely
    to bake, the seeds should not be sown so deep; and it is
    always well, in such cases, to apply some very light and
    clean mulch. The plants should be well cultivated during
    the season, and they should attain a height of six to twelve
    inches or more the first year. If the plants come thickly,
    they must be thinned out.

    In the fall of the first year the seedlings should be large
    enough to be dug and sold to general nurserymen. Sometimes
    the poorest plants are allowed to stand another year,
    but they are usually so scattering that they do not pay for the
    use of the land, and they should be transplanted the same
    as the larger stock, or the weakest ones may be thrown away.
    The stocks are dug with a plow or tree-digger and heeled-in
    closely, so that the leaves "sweat" and fall off. The plants
    are then stored in sand, moss or sawdust in a cellar. Before
    they are shipped the tops are cut off near the crown, usually
    with a hatchet on a block. The stocks are then graded into
    budding and grafting sizes. The general nurserymen buy
    these stocks in fall or early winter. Those which are root-grafted
    are worked during late winter, but those intended for
    budding, or which must be grown another season before
    they attain sufficient size for working, are "dressed" (See
    Chapter V) and heeled-in; in the spring they are set in
    nursery rows, from a foot to eighteen inches apart in the
    row. The nurseryman reckons the age of his tree from the
    time the seedling is transplanted, rather than from the time
    the seed was sown.

    Seedling raising is usually conducted by men who make it
    a business and who supply the general nurserymen of the
    country. It is largely practiced at the west, where the deep
    and strong soils produce a rapid growth. The yearling trees
    are graded by the western growers into about four lots:
    "Extras," or those at least one-fourth inch in diameter at the
    crown and having twelve inches of both top and root; these
    are used mostly as budding stocks the next season, "Commons,"
    those between three-sixteenths and one-fourth inch
    at the crown and having eight inches of root; these are used
    for immediate root-grafting. "Second-class," those from
    two to three-sixteenths inch at the crown, and "third-class,"
    or all those under two-sixteenths. The last two classes must
    be grown in the field for one or two seasons before they can
    be worked.

    Dwarf stocks are mostly obtained from mound-layering.
    The common stock for dwarfing is the Paradise apple, a
    dwarf variety of the common apple species (_Pyrus Malus_).
    This variety rarely attains a height of more than four feet.
    A larger or freer stock is the Doucin, also a variety of _Pyrus
    Malus_, which will produce an engrafted tree intermediate in
    size between that given by the Paradise and free or common
    stocks. This is little used in this country. To obtain stools
    for mound-layering, the tree, when well established, is cut
    off within four or six inches of the ground in spring, and during
    the summer several shoots or sprouts will arise. The next
    year the stool is covered by a mound, and by autumn the layers
    are ready to take off. Sometimes, when stocks are rare,
    mound-layering is performed during the first summer, before
    the young shoots have hardened, but good stocks are not obtained
    by this method. Common green layering is sometimes
    practiced the first year, but it is not in favor. The dwarf
    stocks, in common with all apple stocks, may be propagated
    by root-cuttings and by hard-wood cuttings.

    Apple stocks are either grafted or budded. Root-grafting
    is the most common, especially at the west where long scions
    are used in order to secure own-rooted trees. (See Chapter
    V.) Budding is gaining in favor eastward and southward;
    it is performed during August and early September in the
    northern states, or it may be begun on strong stocks in July
    by using buds which have been kept on ice. Stocks should
    be strong enough to be budded the same year they are transplanted,
    but the operation is sometimes deferred until the
    second summer. Stocks which cannot be worked until the
    second year are unprofitable, especially on valuable land.
    For root-grafting, strong one-year-old roots are best, but
    two-year-olds are often used.

    In common practice, the root is cut into two or three
    pieces of two to three inches each, but stronger trees are
    obtained, at least the first year or two, by using the whole
    root and grafting upon the crown. The lowest piece is
    usually small and weak and is generally discarded.

    The apple is easily top-grafted and top-budded. (See
    Chapter V.)

  =Apple Berry.= See Billardiera.

  =Apricot= (_Prunus Armeniaca_). _Rosaceæ._

    The apricot thrives upon a variety of stocks. Apricot
    stocks are used in apricot-growing regions, especially for
    deep and rich well-drained soils. The pits grow readily if
    given the same treatment as that detailed for the peach
    (which see). The stocks are also handled in the same manner
    as peach-stocks. Apricots upon apricot roots are not
    largely grown outside of California, in this country. Apricot
    stocks can be grown from root-cuttings the same as cherries
    and other stone-fruits.

    The apricot does well upon the peach, especially on light
    soils. In the warmer parts of the country peach is much used.

    Plum stocks are commonly used at the north, especially if
    the trees are to be planted in moist or heavy soils. The
    common plum is generally used, but some of the native
    plum stocks are now coming into favor, especially in trying
    climates. The Russian apricots, which are a hardy race of
    _Prunus Armeniaca_, are grown in colder climates than the
    common varieties, and they therefore demand hardy stocks.
    Any of the native plums make good stocks, but the Marianna
    is now coming into especial prominence. The myrobolan
    plum can be used for all apricots, but it is not popular, particularly
    in severe climates.

    The almond, both hard and soft-shelled, is sometimes used
    for the apricot, but the union is likely to be imperfect and it
    is not recommended. Almond-rooted trees are best adapted
    to light soils.

    Varieties of apricots are usually budded, in the same way
    as the peach, although they may be side-grafted at the crown
    in the nursery row.

  =Aquartia.= See Solanum.

  =Aquilegia= (Columbine). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Increased by seeds. They must be sown very thinly, soon
    after being ripe, in a sandy soil or in pans in a cold-frame.
    Division of the root is the only way to perpetuate any particular
    variety with certainty.

  =Arabis= (Wall Cress, Rock Cress). _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in the border or in pans, in spring.
    By divisions of the root, and by cuttings placed in a shady
    border during summer.

  =Arachis= (Pea-Nut, Ground-Nut). _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in heat; and,
    when the plants have grown to a sufficient size, they should
    be potted off singly. See under Pea-Nut.

  =Arachnimorpha.= See Rondeletia.

  =Aralia.= _Araliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by root-cuttings; also by stem
    cuttings, in heat.

  =Araucaria,= Eutacta. _Coniferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in pans or boxes, with but gentle
    heat. By cuttings from the leading shoots, placed firmly in
    a pot of sand; they first require a cool place, but afterwards
    may be subjected to a slight warmth. When rooted, pot off
    into fibrous loam, mixed with leaf soil and sand.

  =Arbor-vitæ.= See Thuya.

  =Arbutus= (Strawberry Tree). _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in sand during
    early spring, and by grafting, budding, or inarching upon _A.
    Unedo._

  =Arctotheca=. _Compositæ._

    Propagated by divisions of the plant, or by cuttings in
    spring.

  =Arctotis.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which may be made at any time;
    they should be pricked in pots of very sandy soil, and placed
    in very gentle warmth. They must be kept uncovered and
    moderately dry, or they will rot.

  =Ardisia.= _Myrsineæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings.

  =Areca= (Cabbage Palm). _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in a compost of
    loam, peat, and leaf soil, in equal parts, with a liberal addition
    of sand, and placed in a moist and gentle heat.

  =Arenaria= (Sandwort). _Caryophylleæ._

    Increased by seeds, division or cuttings; the last placed
    under a hand-glass will root freely. Seeds should be sown
    in spring in a cold-frame. The best time to divide the plant
    is early spring, or during July and August.

  =Aretia.= See Androsace.

  =Argania.= _Sapotaceæ._

    Increased by layers and cuttings. The latter require a
    propagating-frame. Both should be made in autumn and
    spring, and in a moderately heated greenhouse.

  =Argemone.= _Papaveraceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which may be sown out-doors in spring;
    those of the rarer species in a hot-bed.

  =Argyreia= (Silver-weed). _Convolvulaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which will do well in sand, with a
    hand-glass over them, in a little bottom heat.

  =Argyrochæta.= See Parthenium.

  =Argyroxyphium.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Arisarum.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated in spring by seeds or divisions of the root.

  =Aristea.= _Irideæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions.

  =Aristolochia= (Birthwort). _Aristolochiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and layers, which are not very satisfactory.
    Cuttings root freely in sand, under a bell-glass
    with bottom heat. The seeds must be fresh.

  =Aristotelia.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by layers, or by ripened cuttings, which root
    freely if placed under a hand-glass.

  =Armeria= (Thrift, Sea Pink). _Plumbagineæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring, in pots of sandy soil,
    and placed in a cold-frame; by division, separate pieces
    being planted as cuttings under hand-glasses.

  =Arnatto.= See Bixa.

  =Arnebia.= _Boragineæ._

    Increased by seeds. Cuttings of the strong shoots should
    be inserted in pots of sandy soil, and placed in gentle heat.

  =Arnica.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in a cold-frame in spring, and
    by divisions, which should be made in spring.

  =Aronicum.= See Doronicum.

  =Arracacha.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by divisions of the roots.

  =Arrow-root.= See Calathea.

  =Arrhostoxylum.= See Ruellia.

  =Artabotrys.= _Anonaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds; and by cuttings of ripened wood,
    placed in early spring in sand under a frame, with bottom
    heat.

  =Artanema.= _Scrophulariaceæ._

    Increased readily by seeds and cuttings.

  =Artanthe.= See Piper.

  =Artemisia= (Mugwort, Southernwood, Wormwood). _Compositæ._

    The annuals by seeds; the herbaceous ones, by dividing
    at the root; the shrubby kinds by cuttings.

  =Arthropodium.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased freely by seeds and by divisions.

  =Arthrostemma.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of small firm side shoots, which
    will root, in April or August, under a hand-glass in sandy
    soil.

  =Artichoke= (_Cynara Scolymus_). _Compositæ._

    Usually grown from seeds. Although the plant is perennial,
    a new stock should be started about every other year.
    It may be increased also by suckers or divisions of the stools.

  =Artichoke=, Jerusalem (_Helianthus tuberosus_). _Compositæ._

    Commonly increased by means of the tubers, which may
    be planted whole or cut into eyes, after the manner of potatoes.
    Seeds are very rarely used.

  =Artocarpus= (Bread Fruit). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagation is difficult. Suckers may be utilized when
    procurable. The young and slender lateral growths are used
    for cuttings.

  =Arum.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated by seeds, but usually by division of the roots,
    the best time being just as they begin their new growth,
    securing as many roots as possible to each division. Any
    rootless pieces should be placed in heat shortly after removal;
    this hastens the formation of roots and excites top
    growth. Arisæmas are treated in the same way.

  =Arundinaria.= _Gramineæ._

    Increased by division of the root.

  =Arundo= (Reed). _Gramineæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions, spring being the best
    time for either method. In early autumn, the canes can be
    cut into lengths of 18 to 24 inches and partly buried in sand
    in a gentle bottom heat, laying them horizontally.

  =Asarum.= _Aristolochiaceæ._

    Propagated easily by divisions in spring.

  =Ascaricida.= See Vernonia.

  =Ascium.= See Norantea.

  =Asclepias= (Milkweed, Swallow-wort). _Asclepiadeæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in pots in spring, pricked out
    singly when large enough, and treated like cuttings. By
    cuttings, which should be secured in spring, struck in gentle
    heat, under a bell-glass, and as soon as they are well-rooted
    potted into small pots. Seeds of _A. tuberosa_ must be sown
    or stratified at once.

  =Ascyrum.= _Hypericineæ._

    Increased by seeds and by careful divisions of the roots in
    spring.

  =Ash.= See Fraxinus.

  =Asimina.= _Anonaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds procured from their native country.
    The seedlings should be raised in pots, and sheltered carefully.
    By layers made in autumn.

  =Aspalathus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings of half-ripened wood, placed
    in sand, in spring, under bell-glasses, which must be wiped
    dry occasionally.

  =Asparagus.= _Liliaceæ._

    The common kitchen garden asparagus is best propagated
    by means of seeds. These are sown in spring as soon as the
    ground can be worked, usually in rows a foot or two apart.
    Thin the young plants to two or three inches apart in the
    row and give good culture, and the plants can be set in the
    field the following spring, and they will give a fair crop after
    growing there two seasons. Small growers nearly always
    buy plants of nurserymen. Old asparagus crowns can be
    divided, but seeds give better plants.

    The ornamental species of asparagus are propagated by
    seeds when they are obtainable; otherwise, by division.

  =Asperula.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by divisions of the roots during
    spring and early summer.

  =Asphodeline.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by division.

  =Asphodelus= (Asphodel). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by division of the root in early
    spring.

  =Aspidistra.= _Liliaceæ._

  =Aspidium.= See under Ferns.

  =Asplenium.= See under Ferns.

    Propagated by suckers.

  =Assonia.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings, which will root freely in
    sand with strong bottom heat, if covered with a bell-glass.

  =Astartea.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by young cuttings, in sand, in gentle heat, under
    a bell-glass.

  =Astelma.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in pots of light, open soil, in
    gentle heat. By half-ripened cuttings, which will root
    readily in sandy soil with a hand-glass over them.

  =Astephanus.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Propagated by divisions; and by cuttings, in sandy soil, in
    moderate heat.

  =Aster= (Aster, Michælmas Daisy, Star-wort). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring, or by root divisions
    made in autumn; also by cuttings, which root freely in
    sandy soil under a hand-glass, with little heat.

  =Asteracantha.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in August; and by divisions in
    spring.

  =Asteriscus.= See Odontospermum.

  =Asterocephalus.= See Scabiosa.

  =Asteropterus.= See Leyssera.

  =Asterostigma.= See Staurostigma.

  =Astilbe.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by division in early spring, and by seeds if
    they are produced.

  =Astragalus= (Milk Vetch). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds should be sown in pots of sandy soil placed in a
    cold-frame, as soon as ripe, or early in the spring, as they may
    lie a long time before germinating. The herbaceous perennials
    also increase by divisions, and the shrubby kinds slowly
    by means of cuttings placed in a cold-frame.

  =Astrantia.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by seeds and root divisions in autumn or spring.

  =Astrapæa.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of young wood made in spring,
    placed in a compost of loam and peat, or sand, under a bell-glass,
    in heat.

  =Astrocaryum=, Phœnicophorum. _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring in a hot-bed; or by
    suckers, if obtainable.

  =Astroloma.= _Epacrideæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings placed in sandy soil, under
    a bell-glass, in a cool house.

  =Asystasia.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of young shoots, placed in sand,
    under a bell-glass, with a strong bottom heat, in spring.

  =Ataccia.= See Tacca.

  =Atalantia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Propagated by ripened cuttings, which will root freely in
    sandy soil under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Atamasco Lily.= See Amaryllis.

  =Athamanta.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring, or by division.

  =Athanasia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by means of cuttings taken from half-ripened
    wood in spring, and placed in sand under a hand-glass.

  =Atherosperma.= _Monimiaceæ._

    Propagated readily by cuttings.

  =Athlianthus.= See Justicia.

  =Athrixia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of young wood, under a bell-glass
    in sandy soil.

  =Athrotaxis.= _Coniferæ._

    Increased by cuttings.

  =Atragene.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds should be stratified, and sown in early spring, in
    gentle heat. By layering in autumn; the layers should
    not be separated for about a year, when they will be vigorous
    plants. By cuttings, which should be set in light soil
    and placed under a hand-glass.

  =Atropa= (Belladonna). _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds.

  =Aubletia.= See Paliurus.

  =Aubrietia.= _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown in spring.
    In early autumn carefully transplant to a cool shady border.
    Also by divisions. Where a stock of old plants exists,
    layer their long slender branches any time after flowering,
    and cover with a mixture of sand and leaf soil; they
    will then root freely and establish themselves in time for
    spring blooming. Cuttings should be "drawn" or grown
    in a frame until they are soft, before they are removed.

  =Aucuba.= _Cornaceæ._

    Readily increased by seeds, sown as soon as ripe; or by
    cuttings, inserted in spring or autumn in sandy soil, with or
    without a covering.

  =Audouinia.= _Bruniaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened wood, in sand,
    under a bell-glass, in gentle heat.

  =Aulax.= _Proteaceæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings, taken off at a joint, and
    inserted in pots of sandy soil. These will root well under a
    hand-glass, in a cool house.

  =Auricula= (_Primula Auricula_). _Primulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown as soon as ripe or in spring, in
    well-drained pots, filled with sandy soil, well watered previous
    to sowing. Cover lightly with coarse sand, place a
    pane of glass over the pot, and place the latter in a hand-glass.
    By offsets, which should be removed when top-dressed,
    as they are more likely to root. Arrange about
    four offsets around the sides of well-drained three-inch pots,
    filled with sandy soil, place under a bell-glass or in a close
    hand-light, water very sparingly so as to prevent them
    damping off. After becoming established, admit air, and pot
    off singly.

  =Australian Feather-palm.= See Ptychosperma.

  =Australian Mint-bush.= See Prostanthera.

  =Avens.= See Geum.

  =Averrhoa.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Increased in spring by half-ripened cuttings, which will
    root in sand, under a hand-glass, with bottom heat.

  =Axillaria.= See Polygonatum.

  =Azalea.= _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown as soon as ripe, or early the following
    spring, in a large shallow frame containing from two
    to three inches of peat, over which more peat must be spread
    by means of a fine sieve; do not cover, but water thoroughly.
    When the seedlings begin to appear they should have air,
    shade, and a daily sprinkling of water; transplant in autumn
    in boxes of peat and coarse sand, water, shade and keep close
    until growth commences. Grafting is largely practiced to
    increase the stock of named varieties or choice seedlings, the
    stock most employed being _A. pontica_ for hardy sorts, and
    some strong-growing variety of _A. Indica_, like "Phœnicia,"
    for tender ones. Layering in spring, enclosing the part buried
    with moss, is also practiced; but the layer must be left
    two years before separating. Cuttings of the last year's
    wood two or three inches long, taken with a heel, root readily
    in sand; about the end of summer is the best time. When
    placed outside they should be covered with a hand-light for
    about two months, and at the end of that time air should be
    given freely.

  =Azara.= _Bixineæ._

    Propagated by cuttings.


  =Babiana.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated quickly by seeds sown in pans, placed in a
    gentle heat. These will grow at almost any time. The
    young plants will require to be carefully transplanted each
    season until they develop into blooming corms. By offsets
    grown in boxes or planted out in light rich soil until large
    enough for flowering.

  =Babingtonia.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of the young sterile shoots, which
    may be planted in sand under a bell-glass, and kept in a
    moderate heat until rooted, when they should be placed
    singly in small pots, in a compost of equal parts loam and
    peat, with a little sand.

  =Baccharis= (Ploughman's Spikenard). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by cuttings.

  =Backhousia.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by half-ripened cuttings, in sand, under a bell-glass,
    in a cool house, during spring.

  =Bactris.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by suckers, which are very easily produced.

  =Badamea.= See Terminalia.

  =Bæa=, Dorcoceras. _Gesneraceæ._

    Propagated easily by seeds.

  =Bæckea.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of young wood, which will root freely
    if placed in a pot of sand, with a bell-glass over them, in
    a cool house.

  =Bæria.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring.

  =Bahia=, Phialis. _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by divisions.

  =Balbisia=, Ledocarpum. _Geraniaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings made from the half-ripened
    wood, placed in sand, under a hand-glass.

  =Baldingera.= See Premna.

  =Balfouria.= See Wrightia.

  =Balm= (_Melissa officinalis_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds sown out-doors in spring. Division.

  =Balsam= (_Impatiens balsamina_). _Geraniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in early spring, in pans of rich,
    sandy soil, and placed in a gentle bottom heat of about 65°.
    Or the seeds may be sown directly in the garden when the
    weather becomes warm. Varieties increased by layers in
    late summer, under glass, or by veneer grafting.

  =Balsamodendron.= _Burseraceæ._

    Increased by cuttings taken from the ripe young wood, in
    spring, and placed under a hand-glass, in bottom heat.

  =Balsam-tree.= See Clusia.

  =Bambusa= (Bamboo). _Gramineæ._

    Propagated by careful division of well-developed plants,
    in early spring, just as new growth is commencing; establish
    the divisions in pots. If young shoots are layered, leave
    only the end exposed.

  =Banana= and =Plantain= (_Musa sapientum_, _M. paradisiaca_ and
  others). _Scitamineæ._

    Edible bananas rarely produce seeds. The young plants
    are obtained from suckers, which spring from the main root-stock.
    These suckers are transplanted when two or three
    feet high. These plants themselves do not produce so good
    crops as the suckers which arise from them, and are not
    transplanted. Two or three suckers are sufficient for a plant
    at a time; what others arise should be transplanted or destroyed.
    The suckers should be set deep, as low as two feet
    for best results. In fifteen or eighteen months the plants
    will bloom, if they have had good care. The stem bears
    fruit but once, but new stems arise to take its place.

  =Baneberry.= See Actæa.

  =Banisteria.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings from ripened wood, which will
    root freely in sandy soil, under a hand-glass, in stove heat.

  =Banksia.= _Proteaceæ._

    Seeds are very unsatisfactory. Propagated by well-ripened
    cuttings taken off at a joint, and placed in pots of sand without
    shortening any of the leaves, except on the part that is
    planted in the sand, where they should be taken off quite
    close. The less depth the better, so long as they stand firm.
    Place them under hand-glasses in a propagating house, but
    do not plunge them in heat.

  =Baphia= (Camwood, Barwood). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which should not be deprived of
    any of their leaves. Place in sand under a hand-glass in
    heat.

  =Baptisia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in sand and
    leaf-mould in the open, or in pots placed in a cold-frame.
    By divisions.

  =Barbadoes Gooseberry.= See Pereskia.

  =Barbarea= (Winter Cress, American Cress, Upland Cress). _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds, divisions, suckers and cuttings.

  =Barberry= (_Berberis vulgaris_). _Berberideæ._

    Propagated by stratified seeds, or by suckers, layers and
    cuttings of mature wood. Layers are usually allowed to remain
    two years. Rare sorts are sometimes grafted on common
    stocks.

  =Barbieria.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the half-ripened wood, which
    should be placed in sand, under a glass, in strong heat.

  =Barkeria.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by divisions made just before new growth
    commences. See under Orchids.

  =Barklya.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds; also by half-ripened cuttings, which
    should be placed in sandy soil, under a bell-glass, in a cool
    house.

  =Barleria=. _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings made of the young wood, and
    placed in a compost of loam and peat with a little rotten
    dung, under a bell-glass, in stove temperature with bottom
    heat.

  =Barnadesia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in spring in heat. By offsets.
    By cuttings made of half-ripened wood in spring, and
    placed in sand, under a bell-glass.

  =Barnardia.= See Scilla.

  =Barosma=, Parapetalifera. _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which root readily if taken from
    ripened wood and placed in a pot of sand, in a shady place
    in a cool house, with a bell-glass over them.

  =Barrenwort.= See Epimedium.

  =Barringtonia.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings taken from the lateral shoots, at a
    joint, when the wood is ripe; place in sand and cover with a
    hand-glass. The cuttings should not be stripped of any of
    their leaves.

  =Bartonia.= _Loaseæ._

    Increased by seeds in spring, in gentle heat. The seedlings should be
    potted singly into small, well-drained pots. In winter they should be
    placed on a dry shelf in a greenhouse or frame.

  =Barwood.= See Baphia.

  =Basil= (_Ocymum Basilicum_ and _O. minimum_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, sown in a hot-bed or out-doors.

  =Bassia.= _Sapotaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings taken from ripened wood; place in
    sand, under a hand-glass, in a strong, moist heat.

  =Basswood.= See Tilia.

  =Bastard Balm.= See Melittis.

  =Bastard Cedar.= See Cedrela.

  =Bastard Indigo.= See Amorpha.

  =Batatas.= See Ipomæa and Sweet Potato.

  =Batemannia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by divisions and offsets.

  =Batschia.= See Lithospermum.

  =Bauera.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by cuttings placed in sandy soil under a glass.

  =Bauhinia= (Mountain Ebony). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which should be taken when the
    wood is neither very ripe nor very young. The leaves must
    be dressed off, and the cuttings planted in sand under a glass
    in moist heat. Also by seeds.

  =Bayberry.= See Myrica.

  =Bean.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds; sow only after the weather is thoroughly settled
    for out-door culture.

  =Bean Caper.= See Zygophyllum.

  =Bean, Sacred, or Water.= See Nelumbium.

  =Beard-tongue.= See Pentstemon.

  =Bear's Breech.= See Acanthus.

  =Bear's Grass.= See Yucca.

  =Beaucarnea.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased chiefly by seeds which have been imported from
    their native country. By cuttings, when obtainable.

  =Beaufortia=, including Schizopleura. _Myrtaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened shoots; place in a
    sandy soil under a glass, with very little heat.

  =Beaumontia.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings placed in sand in bottom heat.

  =Bedfordia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which should be dried a little before
    inserting them in a light soil.

  =Beech.= See Fagus.

  =Beefwood.= See Casuarina.

  =Beet= (_Beta vulgaris_). _Chenopodiaceæ._

    Seeds, sown very early.

  =Befaria=, Bejaria. _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of young wood, placed in sandy
    soil, in gentle heat.

  =Begonia.= _Begoniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, well-ripened before they are gathered,
    and kept very dry until sown. For the successful raising of
    begonias, it is necessary to sow the seed in pans or pots of
    well-drained, light, sandy soil, which should be well watered
    before the seeds are sown. The seeds should not be covered
    with soil, or they will fail to germinate. Place a pane of
    glass over the pans, and set in a warm house or frame,
    where a temperature of about 65° can be maintained, and
    shade from the sun. As soon as the plants are large enough
    they should be pricked off into pans of light leaf-mould soil,
    in which they may remain until large enough to be placed
    singly in pots. By divisions of the rhizomes. Also increased
    by cuttings, which strike freely in pots of sand and leaf-mould,
    and placed on a bottom heat of about 70°. Where
    large quantities are required, a bed of cocoanut fiber in a stove
    or propagating-frame may be used, and in this the cuttings may
    be planted, and remain until well-rooted. Leaf cuttings succeed
    best when laid on sand or cocoanut fiber, and shaded
    from bright sunlight. Select old, well-matured leaves, and
    make an incision with a sharp knife across the principal
    nerves, on the under side. They should then be placed on
    the sand or fiber, and held down by means of a few pieces
    of crock. Under this treatment bulbils will form on the
    lower ends of the nerves of each section of the leaf, and
    these, when large enough, may be removed from the bed and
    potted. Fan-shaped pieces of leaves are often used. Leaf
    cuttings of begonia are described and figure in Chapter IV.
    Species like _B. diversifolia_, etc., may be propagated by the
    bulblets which form in the axils of the leaves. Tuberous begonias
    are best propagated by seeds, as described above, but
    stem-cuttings can be used with fair success, if they are cut just
    below a joint.

  =Bejaria.= See Befaria.

  =Belenia.= See Physochlaina.

  =Bellardia.= See Manettia.

  =Bellevalia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown as soon as
    ripe. By offsets.

  =Bellflower.= See Campanula.

  =Bellidiastrum.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by divisions in early spring, or directly after
    blooming.

  =Bellis= (Daisy). _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in early spring.
    By division after flowering, each crown making a separate
    plant. The soil must be pressed about them moderately firm.

  =Bellwort.= See Uvularia.

  =Bellium.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds; also by divisions made in spring.

  =Beloperone=, Dianthera. _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings. They should be taken in
    spring.

  =Belvala.= See Struthiola.

  =Belvisia.= See Napoleona.

  =Bengal Quince.= See Ægle.

  =Bennetia.= See Saussurea.

  =Bent Grass.= See Agrostis.

  =Benthamia.= _Cornaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown when ripe in a cool house, or
    layering in autumn. By cuttings, and by grafting on the
    dogwood.

  =Benzoin= (_Lindera Benzoin_) _Laurineæ._

    Seed.

  =Berardia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring.

  =Berberidopsis.= _Berberideæ._

    Propagated by seeds in spring, by layering in autumn, or
    by young cuttings in spring.

  =Berberis.= See Barberry.

  =Berchemia.= _Rhamneæ._

    Propagated by layering the young shoots. By ripened
    cuttings, and slips of the root planted under a hand-glass.

  =Bergera.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by layers or by ripened cuttings, which should
    be taken off at a joint and placed in sand under a hand-glass
    in bottom heat.

  =Berkheya.= _Compositæ._

    The herbaceous perennials usually by divisions of the plant
    in spring; the other species by cuttings placed under a glass.

  =Bertolonia.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings.

  =Berzelia.= _Bruniaceæ._

    Increased by young cuttings inserted in sand under a bell-glass,
    in gentle heat.

  =Besleria=, Eriphia. _Gesneraceæ._

    Increased by cuttings placed in heat.

  =Bessera.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by offsets.

  =Betonica.= See Stachys.

  =Betula= (Birch). _Cupuliferæ._

    Increased by seeds, which must be sown as soon as gathered,
    or else stratified. By grafting or budding upon seedling
    stocks of the common kinds; the former should be done
    in spring or late winter, and the latter in summer when the
    buds are ready.

  =Bidens= (Bur Marigold). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by divisions of the plant.

  =Biebersteinia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in April in a slight hot-bed. In
    early summer by cuttings, placed under a hand-glass.

  =Bigelovia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by cuttings.

  =Bignonia= (Trumpet Flower). _Bignoniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds or layering, or, in early spring, by cuttings
    made from good strong shoots with two or three joints.
    Place cuttings of tender sorts in a well-drained pot of sandy
    soil, under a bell-glass, in bottom heat. Also by seeds. _B.
    radicans_ propagates readily from root-cuttings.

  =Billardiera= (Apple Berry). _Pittosporeæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings placed in a pot of
    sandy soil, under a bell-glass, in gentle heat.

  =Billbergia.= _Bromeliaceæ._

    Propagated by suckers which are taken from the base of the
    plant after flowering, when they have attained a good size.
    The best method to adopt is as follows: Take the sucker in
    the hand and gently twist it off the stem; next, trim the base
    by the removal of a few of the lower leaves, and then insert
    each sucker separately in a small pot, in sharp soil. A bottom
    heat of about 80° will greatly facilitate new root growth;
    failing this, they will root freely in the temperature of a
    stove, if placed in a shaded position for two or three weeks,
    after which they will bear increased light and sunshine during
    the latter part of the day.

  =Bilberry.= See Vaccinium.

  =Bindweed.= See Convolvulus.

  =Biophytum.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring on a hot-bed.

  =Biota.= See Thuya.

  =Biotia.= See Madia.

  =Bird of Paradise Flower.= See Strelitzia.

  =Bird's-tongue Flower.= See Strelitzia.

  =Birch.= See Betula.

  =Birthwort.= See Aristolochia.

  =Bitter Sweet.= See Celastrus and Solanum.

  =Bitter Vetch.= See Orobus.

  =Bivonæa.= _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in spring where
    the plants are intended to remain. They should be thinned
    out to insure full growth.

  =Bixa= (Arnatto). _Bixineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown when ripe, in bottom heat, or
    by cuttings put in sand under a hand-glass, in heat; the
    latter is the better method.

  =Blackberry= (_Rubus villosus_ and vars.). _Rosaceæ._

    New varieties are obtained from seeds, which may be sown
    as soon as they are cleaned from the ripe fruit, or which may
    be stratified until the next spring. If the soil is in prime condition,
    fall sowing is preferable.

    Varieties are multiplied by suckers and by root-cuttings.
    The suckers spring up freely about the old plants, especially
    if the roots are broken by the cultivator; but they have few
    fibrous roots and are inferior. The best plants are obtained
    from root-cuttings. Roots from one-fourth to three-eighths
    inch in diameter are selected for this purpose. The roots
    are dug in the fall, cut into pieces an inch or two long, and
    stored until early spring. They may be buried in boxes of
    sand after the manner of stratified seeds, or stored in a cool
    cellar; callusing proceeds most rapidly in a cellar. The
    pieces are planted horizontally an inch or two deep, in loose,
    rich soil. It is best to put them in a frame and give them
    slight bottom heat, although they will grow if planted in the
    open in April or May, but the plants will make much less
    growth the first season. Some varieties do not strike quickly
    without bottom heat. When the variety is scarce, shorter
    and slenderer pieces of root may be used, but these demand
    bottom heat. The heat in the frames is usually supplied by
    manure, or the heat of the sun under the glass may be sufficient.
    In these frames the cuttings can be started in the
    north late in March, or some six or eight weeks before the
    plants can be set out-doors without protection. When the
    weather has become somewhat settled, the plants may be
    planted out, and by fall they will be two to three feet high.

  =Black Boy.= See Xanthorrhœa.

  =Bladder-nut Tree.= See Staphylea.

  =Bladder-pod or -seed.= See Vesicaria.

  =Bladder Senna.= See Colutea.

  =Blakea.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings taken from shoots that are about
    ripe; plant in a pot of sand, and plunge in a moist heat,
    under a hand-glass.

  =Blandfordia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and offsets, or by division of the old
    plants, which must be done when repotting.

  =Blazing Star.= See Liatris.

  =Bleeding Heart.= See Dicentra.

  =Blephilia.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased by division of the roots in early spring.

  =Bletia.= _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by divisions, which should be made after the
    plants have finished flowering, or previous to their starting
    into growth. These are terrestrial, and their flat, roundish
    pseudo-bulbs are usually under ground. They bear division
    well, especially _B. hyacinthina_, which may be cut up into
    pieces consisting of a single pseudo-bulb. (See under Orchids.)

  =Blood Flower.= See Hæmanthus.

  =Blood-root.= See Sanguinaria and Hæmodorum.

  =Blueberry.= See Vaccinium.

  =Blue-eyed Grass.= See Sisyrinchium.

  =Blumenbachia.= _Loaseæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in pots in spring, and placed in
    a gentle heat.

  =Blumia.= See Saurauja.

  =Bobartia.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by separating the offsets during autumn.

  =Bocconia.= _Papaveraceæ._

    Some species grow well from seed. By young suckers,
    taken from established plants during summer. Cuttings
    taken from the axils of the large leaves during early summer
    push freely, so that they will have plenty of roots before
    winter sets in. Root-cuttings of _B. cordata_ strike freely.

  =Bœbera.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by cuttings made of young, rather firm shoots,
    and placed in sand, under a glass.

  =Bœhmeria.= _Urticaceæ._

    Increased by divisions.

  =Boleum.= _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in a pot in spring, placed in a
    frame or in the open border during summer.

  =Boltonia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by divisions of the root in March.

  =Bomarea.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which may be sown in a warm house.
    Also increased by careful division of the underground stem.
    In making a division it is necessary to observe that the part
    taken has some roots by which to live till new ones are
    formed.

  =Bombax= (Silk Cotton Tree). _Malvaceæ._

    Plants raised from seeds brought from their native habitats
    make the best trees. Increased by cuttings, which will
    root readily if not too ripe. They should be taken off at a
    joint, and placed in sand under a bell-glass, in moist heat.

  =Bonapartea.= See Tillandsia.

  =Bonjeania.= See Dorycnium.

  =Bonnaya.= _Scrophularineæ._

    The annual species by seeds, the others by divisions and
    cuttings.

  =Bonnetia.= _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of firm, young shoots inserted in
    sand, under a hand-glass, in a moderate heat.

  =Borago.= _Boragineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown from spring or autumn in any
    good garden soil. Also by divisions in spring, or by striking
    cuttings in a cold-frame.

  =Borassus.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in a strong bottom heat.

  =Borbonai.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in spring. They should be half-ripened,
    and placed in a sandy soil under a bell-glass, in a
    cool house.

  =Boronia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by seed. By young cuttings, or those made from
    half-ripened wood. Place these in a thoroughly drained pot
    of sandy soil, with one inch of sand on the surface, and cover
    with a bell-glass; remove frequently and wipe dry.

  =Borreria.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings. Those of the perennial kinds
    strike root readily in a light soil, in heat. The annual kinds
    require a similar treatment to other tender annuals.

  =Bossiæa.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds should be sown on a slight hot-bed in March. Also
    increased by half-ripened cuttings, which should be placed
    in a pot of sand with a bell-glass over them, in a cool house.

  =Boswellia= (Olibanum Tree). _Burseraceæ._

    Increased easily by cuttings in sand under a glass.

  =Botrychium.= See Fern.

  =Botryanthus.= See Muscari.

  =Bouchea.= _Verbenaceæ._

    Increased during spring by cuttings, placed in sand under
    a glass and in a gentle heat.

  =Bougainvillea.= _Nyctagineæ._

    Propagated by cuttings from the half-ripened wood. Place
    in sandy soil, in a brisk heat. Also grown from root-cuttings.

  =Bouncing Bet.= See Saponaria.

  =Bourbon Palm.= See Latania.

  =Boussingaultia.= _Chenopodiaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and easily by means of the tubercles
    of the stem.

  =Bouvardia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    The old plants should be cut back, placed in heat in a
    stove or pit, and freely syringed, which will cause them to
    break freely and produce a good supply of cuttings. They
    will root from any surface of the stem, and should be about
    two inches long. The cuttings should be dibbled pretty
    thickly into pots about five inches across. A good watering
    must be given without wetting and thereby injuring the foliage.
    Plunge the pots in bottom heat of about 70° or 80°, and
    cover with a bell-glass. Keep moist and shady during sunshine,
    till rooted. They are also readily and more easily increased
    by root-cuttings.

  =Bowiea.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or offsets.

  =Bowstring Hemp.= See Sanseviera.

  =Box Elder.= See Negundo.

  =Box Thorn.= See Lycium.

  =Box Tree.= See Buxus.

  =Brachychiton.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Increased by young cuttings planted in sandy soil in gentle
    heat.

  =Brachycome= (Swan River Daisy). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in early spring in a gentle hot-bed,
    or they may be sown thinly out-doors, late in spring.

  =Brachylæna.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by cuttings from the half-ripened shoots, placed
    in a well-drained pot of sandy soil, under a bell-glass.

  =Brachyrhynchos.= See Senecio.

  =Brachysema.= _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds sown in spring in heat. By layers. In summer
    by cuttings from the half-ripened shoots, placed in sandy soil
    under a bell-glass, in a gentle bottom heat.

  =Brachystelma.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Propagated by divisions of the root, and by cuttings in
    a sandy soil, in heat.

  =Bradleia.= See Phyllanthus.

  =Brahea.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds in heat.

  =Brassia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by dividing the plant when growth has commenced.
    (See under Orchids.)

  =Bravoa.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown as soon as ripe, and by offsets
    in autumn.

  =Bread Fruit.= See Artocarpus.

  =Bread Nut.= See Brosimum.

  =Breakstone.= See Saxifraga.

  =Bredia.= _Melastomaceæ._

  Increased by seeds, and by cuttings from the ripened shoots placed in
  sandy loam, under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Brexia.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Increased by cuttings, the leaves of which should not be
    shortened. Place in sand under a hand-glass, in heat; or a
    leaf taken off with a bud attached will grow.

  =Briza= (Quaking Grass). _Gramineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which may be sown in spring or in
    autumn.

  =Broccoli.= See Cabbage.

  =Brodiæa=, Hookera. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by offsets, which should be left undisturbed with
    the parent bulbs till they reach a flowering state, when they
    may be divided and planted in autumn.

  =Bromelia.= _Bromeliaceæ._

    Some are propagated by seeds. All by cuttings inserted
    in sand, in heat.

  =Bromus.= _Gramineæ._

    Increased by seeds sown outside in late summer or in
    spring, thinning out when necessary.

  =Brongniartia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings of the young shoots, which, if firm
    at the base, will root in sand under a bell-glass, in a cool
    house.

  =Brosimum= (Bread Nut). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripe wood with their leaves on. Place
    in sand in moist heat.

  =Broughtonia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by dividing the plant. (See under Orchids.)

  =Broussonetia= (Paper Mulberry). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown when ripe or kept till the following
    spring; and by suckers and cuttings of ripened wood,
    inserted in autumn in a cool house.

  =Browallia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds. To have blooming plants by holidays they are propagated
    by seeds, sown in spring or summer in pans or pots of
    light, rich, sandy soil, and kept in a close frame or hand-light,
    where they can be shaded till germination takes place.

  =Brownea.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings from the ripened wood; place in
    sand under a hand-glass, in moist heat.

  =Brownlowia.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings made from ripe shoots; place in
    sand, under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Brucea.= _Simarubeæ._

    Increased by cuttings from ripened wood, which will root
    freely in a pot of sand under a hand-glass, in moderate heat.

  =Brugmansia.= See Datura.

  =Brunfelsia=, Franciscea. _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by cuttings placed in sand under a bell-glass
    in moderate heat. When rooted, place in pots with a compost
    of loam, leaf soil, peat and sand.

  =Brunia.= _Bruniaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of young shoots, which root freely
    in sand under a hand-light in summer.

  =Brunonia.= _Goodenovieæ._

    Propagated by divisions in early spring before repotting.

  =Brussels Sprouts.= See Cabbage.

  =Brunsvigia.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by offsets of considerable size. They should be
    potted carefully in a mixture of sandy loam and peat, with
    good drainage, and kept tolerably warm and close until established;
    water sparingly until root action has commenced.
    The best place for growing the offsets into a flowering size is
    on a shelf near the glass, in a temperature of from 50° to 55°.

  =Brya.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds or cuttings placed in a hot-bed.

  =Bryonia.= _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by divisions of the tuber.

  =Bryophyllum.= _Crassulaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings; or by simply laying the leaf on
    moist sand, and at each indentation upon the margin a plantlet
    will appear.

  =Bucco.= See Agathosma.

  =Buceras.= See Terminalia.

  =Bucida.= See Terminalia.

  =Buckbean.= See Menyanthes.

  =Buckeye.= See Æsculus.

  =Bucklandia.= _Hamamelideæ._

    Increased by cuttings of ripened shoots placed in sandy
    loam under a hand-glass, in moderate heat. Water carefully,
    for they are liable to rot off.

  =Buckthorn.= See Rhamnus.

  =Buckwheat= (_Fagopyrum esculentum_ and _Tartaricum_). _Polygonaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Buffalo Berry.= See Shepherdia.

  =Bugle.= See Ajuga.

  =Bugle Lily.= See Watsonia.

  =Bugwort.= See Cimicifuga.

  =Bulbine.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased--the bulbous-rooted species by offsets, and the
    herbaceous sorts by suckers and divisions. Also by cuttings.

  =Bulbocodium.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by offsets in a rich, sandy loam. Take up the
    bulbs, divide and replant them every second year, handling
    in autumn and renewing the soil or planting in new positions.

  =Bulbophyllum=, Anisopetalum, Bolbophyllum, Tribrachium. _Orchideæ._

    Propagated by division of the pseudo-bulbs.

  =Bulbospermum.= See Peliosanthes.

  =Bullrush.= See Typha and Juncus.

  =Bumalda.= See Staphylea.

  =Bunchosia.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripened shoots, placed in sand
    under a bell-glass, in moist bottom heat. Good drainage is
    essential.

  =Buphthalmum= (Ox-eye). _Compositæ._

    Propagated in spring or autumn by divisions.

  =Bupleurum= (Hare's Ear). _Umbelliferæ._

    The annuals by seeds sown in spring out-doors; the herbaceous
    perennials may be increased by divisions made in
    autumn or spring, and the greenhouse species by cuttings
    made in spring.

  =Burchardia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by offsets or divisions made just previous to
    potting in spring. It is best to repot annually. Good drainage
    should be allowed, and the plant must not be potted too
    firmly.

  =Burchellia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, not too ripe, planted in sand and
    placed under a hand-glass, in a gentle heat.

  =Burgsdorffia.= See Sideritis.

  =Burlingtonia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by dividing the plant. (See under Orchids.)

  =Burnet.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and division.

  =Burning Bush.= See Euonymus.

  =Bursaria.= _Pittosporeæ._

    Increased by young cuttings put in sand under a bell-glass,
    with a little bottom heat.

  =Bursera.= _Burseraceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings placed under a bell-glass, with
    bottom heat.

  =Burtonia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Some of the species produce seed in abundance, and these
    form the best means of increase. By young cuttings, which
    root freely in sandy soil in a cool house, with a bell-glass
    over them.

  =Butcher's Broom.= See Ruscus.

  =Butomus= (Flowering Rush). _Alismaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by divisions of the roots in spring.

  =Buttercup.= See Ranunculus.

  =Butternut.= See Juglans.

  =Butterwort.= See Pinguicula.

  =Button-wood.= See Platanus.

  =Buxus= (Box Tree). _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown as soon as ripe, in any light,
    well-drained soil. They can be increased by suckers and
    divisions; by layers of young or old wood, made in autumn
    or early spring; by cuttings made of the young shoots, from
    four to six inches in length, in a sandy place in spring or
    fall. The latter method is the better way in this country, and
    in the north the cuttings should be handled under glass.

  =Byrsonima.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of half-ripened shoots in sand under
    a hand-glass, in moist bottom heat.


  =Cabbage= (_Brassica oleracea_, and vars.). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds. They may be sown in the open ground in spring,
    or in the fall and the young plants wintered in a cold-frame,
    or in a hot-bed or forcing-house in late winter and spring.
    Brussels sprouts, broccoli and cauliflower are treated in the
    same manner.

  =Cabbage Palm.= See Areca.

  =Cabomba.= _Nymphæaceæ._

    Propagated by root divisions.

  =Cacalia.= See Senecio.

  =Cacao.= See Theobroma.

  =Cactus.= _Cacteæ._

    Propagation by seeds is not often adopted, as it is a very
    slow method. The seeds should be sown in very sandy soil,
    and placed in a semi-shady position until germination commences,
    when they may be exposed and very carefully
    watered. Usually propagated by cuttings or offsets, which
    should be made with a sharp cut, and laid upon a sunny
    shelf or on dry sand until the wound is healed and roots emitted,
    when they should be potted in sandy soil. Place with
    the others, and keep syringed. Grafting is resorted to with
    weak kinds, which will not grow freely except upon the stock
    of a stronger species; and by this means, also, such kinds
    can be kept from the damp soil, which frequently causes decay.
    The stocks usually employed are those of _Cereus tortuosus_,
    _C. peruvianus_, _Pereskia aculeata_, etc., according to the
    species intended for working; they readily unite with each
    other. If the scion and stock are both slender, cleft-grafting
    should be adopted; if both are broad it is best to make
    horizontal sections, placing them together and securing in
    proper position by tying with matting, but not too tightly, or
    the surface may be injured.

  =Cæsalpinia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which are somewhat difficult to
    root, but may succeed if taken from the plant in a growing
    state and planted in sand with a hand-glass over them, in
    heat.

  =Cajanus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Plants are usually raised from seeds obtained from the
    West Indian Islands and India. Also grown from young
    cuttings, put in sand with a hand-glass over them, in heat.

  =Cakile= (Sea Rocket). _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring.

  =Caladium.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by tubers, which have been kept dry or rested
    for some time. Place in small pots in a stove or pit, where
    the night temperature is maintained from 60° to 65°, and
    syringed daily once or twice at least. Large tubers, if sound,
    may be divided and the pieces potted. Some also by cuttings.

  =Calamagrostis.= _Gramineæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in autumn or spring. _C. arenaria_
    (now _Ammophila arundinacea_), used for holding sands along
    sea-shores, is propagated by division and can probably be
    handled easily by root-cuttings.

  =Calamintha.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased by seeds, root divisions, or cuttings in spring.

  =Calamus.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds.

  =Calandrinia.= _Portulacaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in pots where they are intended
    to flower, as transplantation, unless performed with more
    than ordinary care, will check their growth or result in loss.

  =Calanthe.= _Orchideæ._

    As a rule, the natural annual increase in the number of
    pseudo-bulbs meets the requirements of most cultivators.
    Where a quick propagation is desired, it may be performed
    by dividing the pseudo-bulbs transversely; after allowing
    the raw surface to callus, the upper part should be set on
    moist sand, and several buds will form around the base.
    The bottom portion may be used in the ordinary way.
    Another plan is to divide the pseudo-bulbs lengthwise into
    two or more pieces. (See under Orchids.)

  =Calathea.= _Scitamineæ._

    Increased by division in summer or any time between that
    and the spring months. When making divisions, see that
    each crown is well furnished with roots.

  =Calceolaria= (Slipperwort). _Scrophularineæ._

    Herbaceous kinds increased by seeds sown from June to
    August on pans of light, sandy soil, which should be soaked
    with water before sowing. Care must be taken to make the
    surface of the soil level, and also to sow the seed as evenly
    as possible. It is better not to cover with soil, but a sheet
    of glass should be laid over the pan, which must be placed
    in a shady part of the greenhouse or cold-frame until the
    young plants show the first leaf. The glass can then be
    gradually removed. The shrubby kinds, by seeds and by cuttings
    in August. Place in a cold-frame facing the north, in
    sandy soil, and when rooted, pot off into 3-inch pots. Place
    in a light, sunny frame, where they may remain until the
    middle of February.

  =Caldcluvia.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the half-ripened shoots planted
    in sand under a hand-glass, and placed in a very gentle bottom
    heat.

  =Calectasia.= _Juncaceæ._

    Propagated by divisions.

  =Calendula= (Marigold). _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds and by cuttings, which thrive well in a
    compost of loam and peat.

  =Caliphruria.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by bulbels. After flowering, the plants should
    have a slight heat, and when starting into new growth should
    be repotted.

  =Calliandra.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings of rather firm young wood, in sand
    under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Calla.= See Richardia.

  =Callicarpa=, Porphyra (French Mulberry). _Verbenaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions or by cuttings of the young
    shoots, with the same treatment as Fuchsia.

  =Callichroa.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring in a slight hot-bed, and
    placed in the open border later; or if sown out-doors it will
    still flower in the autumn.

  =Callicoma.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by half-ripened cuttings, placed in sandy soil
    under a hand-glass.

  =Calligonum=, Pallasia, Pterococcus. _Polygonaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which will root in spring or autumn
    if placed under a hand-glass.

  =Calliprora.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by offsets, which should not be removed from
    the parent bulbs until they are of good size.

  =Callipsyche.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds and bulbels.

  =Callirhoe= (Poppy-Mallow). _Malvaceæ._

    Perennials by seeds, divisions of roots, and cuttings; the
    annuals by seeds only. Cuttings should be started in sandy
    soil in a frame.

  =Calliopsis.= See Coreopsis.

  =Callistachys.= See Oxylobium.

  =Callistemon.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by ripened cuttings in sand under
    a glass.

  =Callistephus=, Callistemma (China Aster). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown under cover
    in spring, or seeds for late plants may be sown in the open.

  =Callitris=, Frenela. _Coniferæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by cuttings inserted under a hand-light
    in autumn, and wintered in a cold pit.

  =Calluna= (Heather). _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the tender shoots inserted in
    pure sand under glass in a cool house in autumn.

  =Calochortus= (Mariposa Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, offsets, and by the tiny bulblets on the
    upper portion of the stem. Sow seeds as soon as ripe, or
    early in the year, thinly in pans, so that the young plants
    may pass a second season in the seed pots on pans. Place
    in a cool house or frame, and keep the plants close to the
    glass during their early stages, as they are very liable to
    damp off. Early the third season pot off and plant singly,
    encouraging them to grow freely. The offsets are best removed
    when the plants are in a dormant state, placed in pots
    or pans, or planted out in pits or frames until they reach
    flowering size.

  =Calodendron.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of half-ripened wood placed in sand
    under a glass, in gentle bottom heat.

  =Calophaca.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds. May be grafted on the common
    laburnum.

  =Calophanes.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by division of the roots in spring or fall.

  =Calophyllum.= _Guttiferæ._

    Increased by cuttings made from the half-ripened shoots,
    which root freely in sand, if placed under a glass in bottom
    heat.

  =Calopogon.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by offsets taken from the tuberous roots.

  =Calothamnus.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of young wood, firm at the base.
    Place in sand and cover with a hand-glass.

  =Calotis.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by divisions of the root.

  =Calotropis.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Propagated by young cuttings thinly dibbled in a pot of
    sand, placed under a hand-glass in heat. They must not receive
    too much moisture, or they will rot.

  =Caltha= (Marsh-Marigold). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown as soon as ripe, or by dividing
    the roots in early spring, or in summer after flowering.

  =Calycanthus= (Sweet-scented Shrub Allspice). _Calycanthaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in a cold-frame; by divisions or
    offsets, and by layers put down in summer.

  =Calycophyllum.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripe shoots, which will root
    in sand, if placed under a bell-glass, in bottom heat.

  =Calypso.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by offsets.

  =Calyptranthes.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Propagated by layers, or by cuttings placed in heat.

  =Calystegia= (Hedge Bindweed, Bearbind). _Convolvulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring, or by dividing the
    plants.

  =Calythrix.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of the young shoots placed in sand,
    under a bell-glass in a cool house, in late spring.

  =Camassia=, Sitocodium. _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in a warm situation out-doors,
    or in pots or boxes under glass. The young plants should
    remain at least two years in the seed beds. Also increased
    by offsets, which are produced very freely, and should be removed
    either when in a dormant condition, or just previously
    to starting into fresh growth, and arranged in clumps or lines,
    placing a little sand about them.

  =Cambessedesia.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by half-ripened cuttings, which root freely in
    a mixture of peat and sand, if placed under a glass, in heat.

  =Camellia=, including Thea (Japanese Rose). _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    The single red camellia by either seeds, layers or cuttings.
    Double and variegated camellias by layers, but cuttings will
    succeed. Seeds give suitable stocks on which to inarch or graft
    the rarer kinds. The ripened shoots of the preceding summer
    should be taken off in August. Two or three of the lower
    leaves should be removed, and the cuttings planted firmly in
    the soil with a dibble. The pans containing the cuttings
    should be kept in a plant or cold-frame, without being covered
    with glass, but shaded during bright sunshine. In
    the following spring, such as have struck will begin to push,
    when they need to be placed in a gentle heat. Inarching
    or grafting is done in early spring, as soon as growth commences.

  =Camœnsia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which will root in sandy loam, if
    placed under a bell-glass.

  =Camomile.= See Anthemis.

  =Campanula= (Bellflower, Slipperwort). _Campanulaceæ._

    Increased by seeds. The perennials are also propagated
    by dividing the roots, or by young cuttings in spring.

  =Campanumæa.= _Campanulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions.

  =Camphora= (Camphor-tree). _Laurineæ._

    Increased by cuttings and seeds.

  =Campion.= See Silene.

  =Camptopus.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in sandy loam under a glass, in bottom
    heat.

  =Canarina=, Pernettya. _Campanulaceæ._

    Propagated by divisions when repotted or by young cuttings
    in a sandy soil, in gentle warmth.

  =Candollea.= _Dilleniaceæ._

    Increased sometimes by seeds, but usually by cuttings,
    which will root if placed under a hand-glass in a compost of
    equal parts loam and peat, with enough sand to render the
    whole porous.

  =Candytuft.= See Iberis.

  =Canella.= _Canellaceæ._

    Increased by well-ripened cuttings taken off at the joint.
    They will root in sand under a hand-glass, with bottom heat,
    in spring; but care should be taken not to deprive them of
    any of their leaves.

  =Canna=(Indian Shot). _Scitamineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in heat in late winter. The
    seeds are very hard, and germination will be materially stimulated
    if they are soaked in tepid water for twenty-four
    hours. They should be sown thinly in pans (a mixture of
    sand and leaf-loam is best for them), and a covering of one
    and one-half or two inches of earth is not excessive. It is a
    good plan to sow the seed singly in small pots. Also increased
    by divisions; they form a root-stock, each portion
    of which, with bud and roots attached, may be converted
    into an independent plant.

  =Cannabis= (Hemp). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring.

  =Cantua=, Periphragmos. _Polemoniaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings placed in sand under glass.

  =Capparis= (Caper-tree). _Capparideæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripe shoots, which will root in
    sand under glass, in moist heat.

  =Caprifolium.= See Lonicera.

  =Caragana= (Siberian Pea-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by root-cuttings; the low-growing
    shrubs by seeds and layers. Caraganas are generally increased
    by grafting on _C. arborescens_, which is easily raised
    from seeds, sown when ripe or in spring.

  =Carapa.= _Meliaceæ._

    Increased by ripe cuttings, which will root in sand under
    glass, in a moist heat.

  =Cardamine,= including Pteroneurum (Lady's Smock). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds. Propagated easily by division after flowering.

  =Cardinal-flower.= See Lobelia.

  =Carduncellus.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds. Increased by divisions of the roots.

  =Carex=(Sedge). _Cyperaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by divisions. Seeds often lie dormant
    the first year.

  =Careya.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Propagated by division, or by ripened cuttings, which root
    freely if planted in sand under a hand-glass, and placed in
    moist bottom heat.

  =Carica= (Papaw-tree). _Passifloreæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripe shoots with their leaves on.
    They root readily in a sandy soil, and in a gentle bottom
    heat.

  =Carissa.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of ripe wood placed in sand under
    glass, in bottom heat.

  =Carlina.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring. With difficulty by
    divisions.

  =Carmichælia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened side shoots in sand
    under a glass, in a cool house in late spring.

  =Carnation.= _Caryophylleæ._

    By propagating by seed, new and excellent varieties are
    raised. Sow the seeds in April or May, and in a slight hot-bed
    or in a greenhouse. Also propagated by layering, which
    should be done at the end of July or the beginning of August.
    The shoots selected should be denuded of a few of their leaves
    at the base of the young wood, and a slit must be made from
    this point upwards, extending through a joint of the bare
    stem, so that a tongue is formed.

    Increased also by cuttings. It is necessary to have a slight
    bottom heat, and on it put four or five inches of light soil,
    covered with clean sand. The cuttings must be long enough
    to have a tolerably firm base, and they must either be taken
    with a heel or cut off at a joint, and firmly inserted in the
    soil. This is the ordinary method. See Fig. 52, _b_.

  =Carob=, Algaroba, or St. John's Bread (_Ceratonia siliqua_).
    _Leguminosæ._

    Stocks are obtained by seeds. The seeds are often treated
    to scalding water before sowing, in the same manner as locust
    seeds. Varieties are grafted or budded on the seedlings,
    or they may be multiplied by means of hard-wood cuttings
    in frames.

  =Carpinus= (Hornbeam). _Cupuliferæ._

    Increased by seeds, which vegetate irregularly. Varieties
    propagated by budding or grafting.

  =Carpodinus.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated easily from cuttings of half-ripened shoots.

  =Carrion Flower.= See Stapelia.

  =Carthamus= (Safflower). _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in a gentle heat in spring.

  =Carya.= See Hicoria.

  =Caryocar=, Rhizobolus (Butternut). _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings, which will root in sand
    in heat.

  =Caryophyllus= (Clove-tree). _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of firm shoots with the leaves left
    on. These will root if planted in sand in a moist heat.

  =Caryopteris.= _Verbenaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, by divisions, or by cuttings.

  =Caryota.= _Palmæ._

    Increased easily by seeds or by suckers.

  =Cashew.= See Anacardium.

  =Casimiroa.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased readily by seeds.

  =Cassandra= (Leather Leaf). _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds very carefully sown, or by layers.

  =Cassava= (_Manihot Aipe_). _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the stem and by suckers. Cut
    the large main stalks into pieces from four to six inches long
    and set them perpendicularly into the ground in the field.
    The cuttings can be struck at various times, but spring is usually
    preferred. The stalks can be kept over winter by covering
    with sand on a dry knoll, placing the stalks and sand
    in layers. Cover the whole with boards to shed the water.
    Suckers which appear during summer can be removed and
    planted or made into cuttings.

  =Cassia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Annuals and biennials by seeds, which must be sown in
    spring, in a gentle heat. The shrubby species by cuttings of
    half-ripened shoots, which will root in heat at about the same
    time of the year. _C. Marylandica_ also by division.

  =Cassine.= _Celastrineæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings, which will readily strike root
    if planted in a pot of sand with glass over them.

  =Cassinia.= _Compositæ._

    Annuals by seeds. The herbaceous and shrubby kinds
    are increased in spring by dividing the roots, or by cuttings
    of half-ripened shoots placed in sand.

  =Castalia.= See Nymphæa.

  =Castor Bean.= See Ricinus.

  =Casuarina= (Beefwood). _Casuarineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings made of half-ripened
    shoots, placed in sand under glass.

  =Catalpa.= _Bignoniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings made of the ripe wood.
    The named varieties and _C. Bungei_ are propagated by soft
    cuttings in June and July. Grafts are also used.

  =Catananche.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in spring. Also
    by division.

  =Catchfly.= See Silene.

  =Catesbæa= (Lily Thorn). _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings planted in sand in spring, and
    plunged in heat.

  =Catmint.= See Nepeta.

  =Catnip= or =Catmint= (_Nepeta Cataria_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds. Division.

  =Cat's Tail.= See Typha.

  =Cattleya.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by the pseudo-bulbs. (See under Orchids.)

  =Cauliflower.= See Cabbage.

  =Caulophyllum.= _Berberideæ._

    Propagated by divisions of the roots, made in early spring
    or after flowering. Also by seeds.

  =Ceanothus.= _Rhamneæ._

    Increased by layers, which is the readiest way of obtaining
    strong plants, or by cuttings, which should be inserted
    in a cold-frame.

  =Cecropia= (Snake Wood). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of ripened shoots. Place in sandy
    peat in a moist bottom heat.

  =Cedar.= See Cedrus.

  =Cedrela= (Bastard Cedar). _Miliaceæ._

    Increased by large ripened cuttings, placed in sand, in
    heat.

  =Cedronella.= _Labiatæ._

    The herbaceous species by division of the roots or by cuttings
    of young wood. _C. triphylla_ by cuttings.

  =Cedrus= (Cedar). _Coniferæ._

    Increased by seeds, which are difficult to extract from the
    cones. Gather the cones in spring, and sow the seeds immediately
    in pans. Varieties are propagated by veneer grafts.

  =Celastrus= (Staff-tree, Bitter-sweet). _Celastrineæ._

    Propagated by seeds and suckers, also by layering the
    hardy species in autumn. Ripened cuttings will root freely
    in a compost of loam, peat and sand.

  =Celery= (_Apium graveolens_). _Umbelliferæ._

    By seeds, as described on page 12; or, for the early crop,
    sow under glass, as in a hot-bed.

  =Celosia= (Cockscomb). _Amarantaceæ._

    Propagated by seed sown in spring, in pans of well-drained,
    rich, sandy soil or in the open.

  =Celsia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Increased by seeds, which may be sown in the open border
    and thinned out for flowering, or raised in nursery beds
    and transplanted. _C. Arcturus_ should be increased by cuttings,
    the young wood striking freely in a cool house or
    frame.

  =Celtis= (Nettle-tree). _Urticaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown as soon as ripe.
    By layers, and by cuttings of ripened shoots in autumn.

  =Centaurea.= _Compositæ._

    Annuals by seeds, which may be sown in the open border.
    To propagate _C. Cineraria_, and some others sow seeds in
    August in slight heat, or make cuttings about the beginning
    of September.

  =Centranthus.= _Valerianeæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring.

  =Centronia.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened shoots, which
    should be inserted in peat and sand, under glass.

  =Centropogon.= _Campanulaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, by divisions and by cuttings from any
    young shoots three or four inches long. Take off with a
    heel and place in sharp sandy soil, close around the edge of
    the pot, and then keep close under a propagating-box, in a
    temperature ranging between 60° and 70°.

  =Cephælis.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of firm young shoots, which will root
    well in sandy soil under a hand-glass, in moist stove heat.

  =Cephalanthus= (Button-wood). _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by layers or ripened cuttings in autumn.

  =Cephalotus.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by divisions before new growth
    commences. Also by offsets.

  =Cerastium.= _Caryophylleæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions, or by cuttings inserted
    in the open ground in a shady place, after flowering.

  =Ceratiola.= _Empetraceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by cuttings, which should be placed
    in sandy soil under glass.

  =Ceratonia= (Algaroba Bean, Carob Tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings, which will root if planted
    in sand under a frame.

  =Ceratozamia.= _Cycadaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and sometimes by suckers and divisions;
    but imported plants give most satisfaction.

  =Cercidiphyllum.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by tender cuttings made during the summer,
    and slightly wilted before placing in the frames.

  =Cercis= (Judas-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown about the end of March on a
    bed of light soil, in a gentle heat. They may also be increased
    by layers, but plants raised from seeds thrive best.
    It is not necessary to stratify the seeds, _C. Japonica_ is grown
    from soft cuttings in early summer.

  =Cereus.= See Cactus.

  =Ceropegia.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of small side shoots made in spring,
    which will root in sand, in heat, with or without a glass covering.

  =Cestrum=, including Habrothamnus. _Solanaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in August, the same being potted
    off as frequently as the roots reach the sides of the pots.

  =Chænostoma.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which may be made in autumn and
    placed in a greenhouse or cold pit during the winter.

  =Chætogastra.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in March, or the perennials by
    cuttings in sandy peat.

  =Chamæbatia.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which should be struck in sand in
    a cold-frame.

  =Chamæcyparis.= _Coniferæ._

    Propagated by seeds freely, also by layers, but mainly by
    cuttings put in during October. Select young side shoots
    with a heel; insert in well-drained pots of sandy soil, and
    place in a close cold-frame, keeping fairly moist through the
    winter. In February they should be calloused, and should
    be placed in gentle heat, where they will root freely.

  =Chamæranthemum.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of young shoots, which will root
    in spring if planted in sand and placed in heat.

  =Chamærops=, including Corypha, Taliera. _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by suckers, which generally appear
    in considerable quantities.

  =Chard.= See Beet.

  =Cheilanthes.= See Fern.

  =Chelone= (Turtle Head). _Scrophularineæ._

    They may be increased by means of seeds. Also by dividing
    the plant during fall. Young cuttings inserted in sandy
    soil in a cold-frame grow well.

  =Cherry= (_Prunus Avium and P. Cerasus_). _Rosaceæ._

    Cherry stocks are commonly grown from seeds. If the
    ground is in readiness and is in proper condition, the seeds
    may be planted in fall, or even as soon as they are ripe. If
    stored until spring, they must be stratified and kept very
    cool to prevent germination, and they should be sown at the
    earliest possible moment. They do not need to be cracked
    by hand. Care must be taken that cherry pits do not become
    hard and dry. This precaution is more important with
    cherries than with peaches and plums. At the close of the
    first season the seedlings will be a foot or foot and a half
    high, large enough to transplant into nursery rows after the
    manner of apples, where they are budded the following season.
    In warm climates the pits are sometimes cracked as
    soon as they are gathered, and the "meats" planted immediately.
    They will then make stocks fit for grafting the following
    winter, or for transplanting and budding the following
    summer. Cherry seeds must never be allowed to become
    so dry that the meat is hard and brittle.

    Cherries, in common with other stone fruits, grow readily
    from root-cuttings, in the same manner as blackberries.
    They do better if started over a gentle heat.

    The Mazzard cherry is the stock upon which cherries are
    nearly always worked. It is simply a hardy and vigorous
    variety, with inferior fruit, of the common sweet cherry
    (_Prunus Avium_). Seeds of this are readily procured in this
    country. All varieties of cherries are worked readily upon
    it. The Mahaleb cherry is used as a stock for nearly all varieties
    when dwarf trees are desired. This is a distinct species,
    _Prunus Mahaleb_. The seeds or stocks are usually imported.
    This stock is adapted to heavy clay soils, while the
    Mazzard is not. The Mahaleb is not generally used in this
    country.

    Morello (_Prunus Cerasus_) stocks will no doubt prove to be
    valuable in the northwest, where great hardiness is demanded.
    Seedlings do not sprout or sucker badly, but the natural
    suckers, which are sometimes used for stocks, are likely to
    be more troublesome in this respect. If strong-growing tops
    are worked on Morello stocks, however, there is usually little
    annoyance from suckering.

    It is probable that some of the native American cherries
    can be used as stocks. The common wild red, pin or bird
    cherry (_Prunus Pennsylvanica_) has already been used to some
    extent. The sweet and sour cherries unite readily with it,
    and bear very early. It is yet to be determined how long
    the trees will persist, but there are trees known which are
    sixteen or eighteen years old, and which are still healthy and
    vigorous. The dwarf or sand cherry (_Prunus pumila_), especially
    the western form of it, gives promise as a dwarf stock.

    Cherry stocks are worked both by budding and grafting.
    Budding is the common method. The stocks should be fit
    to work the season they are transplanted, or in the second
    summer from seed. Such as are too small for working then
    may be allowed to stand until the following year.

    In the west, where great hardiness is required, the varieties
    are crown-grafted upon Mazzard stocks in winter. Yearling
    stocks are used, and the cions are from six to ten inches
    long. When planted, only the top bud should be left above
    ground. The cion strikes roots, and own-rooted trees are
    obtained.

    The ornamental cherries are worked upon the same stocks
    as the fruit-bearing sorts. Mazzard is commonly used for
    all species.

  =Chervil= (_Chærophyllum bulbosum_ and _Scandix Cerefolium_).
    _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds, sown much the same as celery seeds, but the plants
    are usually allowed to stand where sown. Seed is often
    sown in autumn.

  =Chestnut= (_Castanea sativa_ and var. _Americana_, and _C. Japonica_).
    _Cupuliferæ._

    Chestnut stocks are grown from seeds. Difficulty is sometimes
    experienced in keeping the seeds, as they lose their
    vitality if dried too hard, and are likely to become mouldy
    if allowed to remain moist. The surest way is to allow the
    nuts to become well dried off or "seasoned" in the fall, and
    then stratify them in a box with three or four times as much
    sand as chestnuts, and bury the box a foot or two deep in
    a warm soil until spring. They do not always keep well if
    stored or stratified in a cellar. Fall planting exposes the
    nuts to squirrels and mice. American stocks are probably
    better than European.

    The stocks are worked by whip-grafting above ground, the
    wound being well tied and protected by waxed cloth. Care
    should be taken to have the stock and cion about the same
    size, in order to secure a good union. Crown-grafting, root-grafting
    and budding have not been very successful in this
    country upon the chestnut. The cions should be cut early,
    before they begin to swell, and kept dormant until the stock
    begins to push into leaf. Only vigorous stocks should be
    grafted. The best results are obtained when the stocks have
    recovered from transplanting, or when they are from three
    to five years old. The working of chestnut stocks is far from
    satisfactory in a commercial way. The union is imperfect
    in many varieties, and usually no more than half the grafts
    take well.

  =Chicory= (_Cichorium Intybus_). Compositæ.

    Seeds, sown in spring where the plants are to grow.

  =Chilopsis= (Desert Willow). _Bignoniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by cuttings of half-ripened shoots
    in sand under a bell-glass, in a gentle bottom heat.

  =Chimonanthus.= _Calycanthaceæ._

    Propagated by layering in the autumn.

  =China Aster.= See Callistephus.

  =Chiococca= (Snowberry). _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which strike root freely in sand
    under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Chionanthus= (Fringe-tree). _Oleaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be started in a cold-frame.
    By layers and cuttings. By grafting or budding it
    on the common ash, it succeeds very well.

  =Chionodoxa.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which are produced freely. They
    should be sown as soon as ripe. By bulbels.

  =Chironia.= _Gentianeæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings inserted in sandy soil,
    and placed in a gentle heat in spring.

  =Chives= or =Cives= (_Allium Schœnoprasum_). _Liliaceæ._

    Division of the clumps.

  =Chloanthes.= _Verbenaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of young shoots, which root freely
    in sandy soil under glass.

  =Choisya.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings.

  =Chrysanthemum.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds to obtain new varieties; these should
    be sown in spring. Division may be made, but this is not
    often practiced. Usually propagated by cuttings of firm,
    healthy, short-jointed shoots, about three inches long.
    They should be made in spring, and placed near the glass
    of a rather close frame having a temperature of about
    45°. No bottom heat should be given. If inserted in pots,
    only the lower leaf should be removed; if in beds the remaining
    foliage should also be trimmed to admit air. The
    soil should be made of equal parts of sand, leaf-mould and
    loam, spreading a layer of sand over the top. Insert about
    one-half of the cutting, press the soil firmly, and water.
    Leaf cuttings have been employed. Inarching and grafting
    may also be performed.

  =Chrysobalanus= (Coco Plum). _Rosaceæ._

    Increased by seeds when procurable. Large cuttings, however,
    taken off at a joint without shortening any of their
    leaves, will root readily if planted thinly in a pot of sand,
    and placed in moist heat with a bell-glass over them.

  =Chrysocoma= (Goldy-locks). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings of half-ripened shoots,
    placed in sand under glass.

  =Chrysogonum.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds. Increased by dividing the roots in spring.

  =Chrysophyllum= (Star Apple). _Sapotaceæ._

    Increased by seeds when procurable. By cuttings of small
    well-ripened shoots, plunged in strong, moist heat.

  =Chrysopsis.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by division in spring.

  =Chrysosplenium= (Golden Saxifrage). _Saxifrageæ._

    Increased easily by division. Also occasionally by seeds.

  =Cicca= (Otaheite Gooseberry). _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Seeds. By cuttings of ripe shoots, which will root in
    sand, if placed under a glass and in bottom heat.

  =Cimicifuga= (Bugwort). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in a cold-frame or border as soon
    as ripe; or by division of the roots in spring.

  =Cinchona= (Peruvian Bark). _Rubiaceæ._

    Imported seeds, and cuttings taken off when ripe and planted
    in a pot of sand, under glass, in a moist heat.

  =Cineraria.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds should be sown under glass; those intended for
    autumn flowering in April and May, those for spring in July
    and August. Light leaf-mould should be used, and about
    an equal quantity of fresh sifted loam and sharp sand added,
    the whole being well mixed. Old cow manure is a good medium
    in which to sow (see page 19); then fill up with fine soil.
    Also by divisions and by cuttings.

  =Cinquefoil.= See Potentilla.

  =Cipura.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown in a slight heat
    in spring; or by bulbels, which are abundantly produced.

  =Circæa= (Enchanter's Nightshade). _Onagrarieæ._

    Seeds; also by the running roots.

  =Cissampelos.= _Menispermaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, which root readily in heat.

  =Cissus.= _Ampelideæ._

    Propagated by cuttings in the spring. Choose the weakly
    shoots that are pruned just before the plants break into new
    growth, or allow the young shoots to grow to a length of
    about two inches. Then cut them off, with a small piece of
    the base branch adhering to the young wood; or the shoots
    may be cut off with one or several of these young branchlets
    on them. Cut the old branch through at the base of each
    young one, and insert the cutting with this heel of the old
    wood entire. In this country, usually grown from common
    green cuttings in summer.

  =Cistus= (Rock-Rose). _Cistineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, by layers or cuttings under frames
    outside, or inside with a gentle bottom heat; but seedlings
    always make the best plants. The seeds should be sown
    early in the spring in pans or boxes in a frame, and lightly
    covered with sifted sandy mould. Cuttings should be made
    from three to four inches long. They may be struck in
    spring or autumn, in sandy peat under glass.

  =Citron= (_Citrus medica_). _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds, which usually reproduce the kind. Mature cuttings,
    the same as lemon. Also budded on orange, lemon or lime
    stocks.

  =Citrus.= _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, layers, cuttings, inarching, grafting and
    budding. For particular methods, see Lemon, Lime, Orange
    and Pomelo.

  =Cladrastis= (Yellow-wood). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seed sown in the open air in spring, or by
    cuttings of the roots.

  =Clarkia.= _Onagrariæ._

    Increased by seeds, which may be sown in spring or autumn
    out-doors.

  =Clavija=, Theophraste. _Myrsineæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened shoots. These will
    root in sandy loam, with a surface consisting wholly of sand,
    if placed in bottom heat.

  =Clematis= (Virgin's Bower). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Clematis may be increased by seeds. The seed vessels
    should be gathered before autumn, and stored in some dry,
    cool place till the following spring, when the seeds they contain
    may be sown in light, sandy soil, and placed in gentle
    heat till they germinate. By layers outside, put in at any
    time. All the varieties of clematis may also be readily increased
    by cuttings made of the young shoots, which may
    be cut up to every eye and planted in gentle heat. Also by
    grafting any of the varieties on portions of clematis roots in
    winter. Good healthy pieces of root obtained from old
    plants answer the purpose well. See also Atragene.

  =Cleome.= _Capparideæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in a frame in spring, with slight
    warmth. Ripened cuttings root freely in moderate heat.

  =Clerodendron=, Ovieda, Siphonantha, Volkameria. _Verbenaceæ._

    Increased by seed, which, if sown when ripe or in the
    spring, and grown on in heat, may be converted into flowering
    plants the second season. Propagated also by cuttings
    of both green and mature wood; also of roots. Suckers.
    The climbing varieties do not root quite so readily from cuttings
    as the others, but cuttings of the ripened wood do well.

  =Clethra.= _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions and layers. Cuttings taken
    from the half-ripened wood will root in gentle heat.

  =Clianthus= (Glory Pea, Parrot Beak). _Leguminosæ._

    _C. Dampieri_ is best raised from seeds, which should be
    sown singly in good-sized pots, when the necessity of first
    shifting will be obviated. _C. puniceus_ and others from cuttings,
    which strike easily in sand in bottom heat.

  =Clintonia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by division of the root in spring.

  =Clitoria.= _Leguminosæ._

    The best method of increasing is by seeds. Increased also
    by cuttings of stubby side shoots, which will root in sandy
    soil, in heat.

  =Cliva=, Imantophyllum. _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions.

  =Clove-tree.= See Caryophyllus.

  =Clusia= (Balsam-tree). _Guttiferæ._

    Increased by cuttings of half-ripened shoots, which will
    strike in sand, with bottom heat.

  =Cobæa.= _Palemoniaceæ._

    Readily raised from fresh seed in spring, if a gentle bottom
    heat is supplied. It is often said that the seeds must
    be placed on edge, but this is a mistake. From cuttings taken
    when young, in spring, and inserted in pots of sandy soil,
    placed in gentle bottom heat.

  =Coccocypselum.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by dividing the creeping stems.

  =Coccoloba= (Seaside Grape). _Polygonaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by cuttings of the ripened wood,
    with leaves entire, and taken off at a joint. These will root
    freely in sand under glass.

  =Cocculus=, Wendlandia. _Menispermaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds. By half-ripened cuttings of side
    shoots; these will root easily in spring or summer, if planted
    in sand and placed in bottom heat, under glass.

  =Cockscomb.= See Celosia.

  =Cocoanut= (_Cocos nucifera_). _Palmæ._

    The nuts are buried in nursery rows, and the young trees
    are transplanted. A more common practice is to remove the
    buried nuts, when they begin to sprout, to the place in which
    the tree is to stand. A nut is then placed in a hole some
    two feet deep, which is gradually filled in as the plant grows.
    In from six to eight years the tree begins to bear.

  =Codiæum=, Croton. _Euphorbiaceæ._

    New varieties are produced by seed. Increased by taking
    off the tops of any strong leading shoots, and making them
    into cuttings. They may be struck by placing singly in small
    pots and covering with bell-glasses, in strong, moist heat,
    where they will soon emit roots, without losing any of the
    leaves attached at the time they were inserted. Or they may
    placed in a bed of sand.

  =Coffea= (Coffee-tree). _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds. Also by ripe cuttings, which strike
    freely in sand under glass, in moist heat; and the young
    plants so raised produce flowers and fruit more readily than
    those grown from seed.

  =Coffee-tree=, Kentucky. See Gymnocladus.

  =Colchicum= (Autumn Crocus). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as ripe in a protected place. Separation.

  =Coleus.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased by seeds for new varieties. By cuttings with
    the greatest freedom at almost any time of the year, and,
    with a good moist heat, they will quickly form fine specimens.
    (Fig. 53.)

  =Colletia.= _Rhamneæ._

    Increased by cuttings of half-ripened wood, six to eight
    inches in length, in a cool greenhouse.

  =Collinsonia.= _Labiatæ._

    Increased readily by dividing roots in spring; also seeds.

  =Colocasia.= See Caladium.

  =Columbine.= See Aquilegia.

  =Colutea= (Bladder Senna). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings, placed in sandy soil
    in the autumn.

  =Combretum.= _Combretaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of side shoots, taken off with a heel,
    planted in sand under glass, and placed in heat.

  =Comesperma.= _Polygaleæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by young cuttings, which root freely if
    planted in sand under glass.

  =Comfrey.= See Symphytum.

  =Commelina.= _Commelinaceæ._

    Increased by seeds. By cuttings, which will root in sand,
    in a gentle hot-bed.

  =Comocladia= (Maiden Plum). _Anacardiaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by ripened cuttings, which will root
    in sand if placed under glass, in heat.

  =Comparettia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by division of the plants. (See under Orchids.)

  =Comptonia= (Sweet Fern). _Myricaceæ._

    Seeds; by dividing the clumps, and by layers, which
    should be put down in autumn.

  =Conocarpus= (Button-tree). _Combretaceæ._

    Seeds. Increased by cuttings of firm shoots, taken in
    April, in bottom heat.

  =Convallaria= (Lily of the Valley). _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by "crowns" or "pips" (see Fig. 17), which
    are the separated growing points of the roots, possessing a
    strong bud. These crowns can be obtained from any well
    established bed in the fall, but they are usually imported.

  =Convolvulus= (Bindweed). _Convolvulaceæ._

    Seeds of the hardy annuals should be sown in spring in
    the open border. The hardy perennials may be increased
    by seeds sown in spring, by division of the roots, and by
    young cuttings.

  =Coprosma.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by layers and cuttings.

  =Coptis.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and division of the roots.

  =Cordia=, Varronia. _Boragineæ._

    Seeds. Increased by cuttings, green or ripe, which strike
    root readily in sand, in heat.

  =Corema= (Portugal Crakeberry, Crowberry). _Empetraceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by cuttings planted during summer.

  =Coreopsis=, Calliopsis. _Compositæ._

    The hardy annuals, which are largely grown under the
    name of calliopsis for summer ornamentation, by seed, which
    should be sown in March in a gentle heat, or outside later.
    The perennials are propagated also by divisions of the root
    in autumn or spring, or during the summer by young cuttings,
    which will strike freely in a cold-frame.

  =Coriander= (_Coriandrum sativum_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds sown in fall or spring.

  =Corn.= See Maize.

  =Corn Salad= (Valerianella, several species). _Valerianeæ._

    Seeds sown in spring, summer or autumn.

  =Cornus= (Dogwood Osier). _Cornaceæ._

    Increased by seed, suckers of soft wood, layers or cuttings.
    The herbaceous species, _C. Canadensis_ and _C. Suecica_, may
    be increased by division, as also by seeds. The willow-like
    cornuses grow from cuttings of ripe wood. Named varieties
    and some species are budded in many cases, especially all
    the weak-growing sorts. _Cornus Mas_, raised from seed, is
    the favorite stock. Shield-budding in late summer and veneer-grafting
    are most successful. (See Fig. 44.)

  =Coronilla.= _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds sown as soon as ripe. The hardy species by division.
    Cuttings strike freely if placed in cold-frames or a
    cool house under a hand-glass in spring, and when calloused,
    introduced to gentle bottom heat.

  =Correa.= _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds. May be propagated by cuttings very readily. Varieties
    are usually grafted on _C. alba_.

  =Cortusa= (Bear's-ear Sanicle). _Primulaceæ._

    Increased by seed sown as soon as ripe in a cold-frame;
    also by carefully dividing the roots.

  =Coryanthes.= See Stanhopea.

  =Corydalis.= _Fumarieæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by dividing the plants directly after
    flowering. The bulbous-rooted species by offsets.

  =Corylus= (Hazel; Cob-nut). _Cupuliferæ._

    Propagated by seeds, suckers, layers or cuttings. Grafting
    and budding are each practicable, and are adopted when
    growing tall standards or scarce varieties. The seed of all
    should be sown as soon as gathered, or stored in sand till the
    following spring. All superior varieties should be increased
    by suckers or layers. Stools kept for layering must be allowed
    to make more growth than those used for suckers. Free
    growth must be encouraged for a year or more, and, any suitable
    time in winter, the shoots should be bent to the ground,
    pegged firmly, and covered to the depth of three inches with
    earth. They will be well-rooted by the following autumn,
    and may then be removed and planted out permanently.

  =Corynostylis=, Calyptrion. _Violarieæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by cuttings of the young wood,
    placed in sand in bottom heat, under glass.

  =Cosmos.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds, usually started under glass. The tuberiferous species,
    like Dahlia, which see.

  =Costus.= _Scitamineæ._

    Increased by dividing the roots.

  =Cotoneaster.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated readily by seed, which should be sown in
    spring; by layers or cuttings in autumn, or by grafting on
    _C. vulgaris_, the common quince, or the hawthorn.

  =Cotton= (_Gossypium_). _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds commonly. Grown as a curiosity under glass; it
    may be increased by soft cuttings.

  =Cotyledon= (Navelwort). _Crassulaceæ._

    Increased by seed, offsets, cuttings of the stem, and by
    leaves. The leaves should be pulled off in autumn, laid on
    dry sand in pans on a shelf in a propagating or other warm
    house, and not watered until small plants appear at the ends
    of the leaves.

  =Cowslip.= See Primula.

  =Crambe.= _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds, by dividing the roots and by root-cuttings.
    See Sea-kale.

  =Cranberry= (_Vaccinium macrocarpon_). _Ericaceæ._

    The cultivated cranberry is propagated entirely by cuttings.
    These are made from vigorous young runners, from
    six to ten inches in length, and they are thrust obliquely into
    the soil until only an inch or two of the tip projects. Some
    blunt instrument, as a stick, is commonly used to force them
    into the sand of cranberry bogs. Planting is done in the
    spring, and the cuttings are taken just previous to the operation.
    If cranberry seedlings are desired, the seeds should be
    sown in flats of peaty earth, which are stored until spring in
    some protected place, in the manner of stratification boxes.
    The seeds should be covered lightly, preferably with fine
    moss. The plants are allowed to grow the first year in the
    box.

  =Crassula.= _Crassulaceæ._

    Seeds; also by cuttings, which should be taken off and
    laid for two or three days in the sun to dry before planting.

  =Cratægus= (Haw, Hawthorn). _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by stratified seeds. Some growers spread the
    haws in shallow piles in the fall, and allow them to decay, so
    that most of the pulp is removed before they are stratified.
    Haws often come irregularly, even from stratified seeds.
    The varieties are grafted, rarely budded, on common stocks.

  =Cress= (_Lepidium sativum_). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, sown at any time of year. See Water-Cress.

  =Cress=, American. See Barbarea.

  =Cress=, Rock. See Arabis.

  =Crinum.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by seed, sown singly as soon as ripe in three or
    four-inch pots, in sandy loam and leaf-mould. Place in a
    temperature of from 70° to 80°, and keep rather dry until
    the plants appear, when more moisture should be applied.
    Also increased by offsets, which should be removed when
    rather small and potted separately, and grown as recommended
    for seedlings.

  =Crithmum.= _Umbelliferæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown as soon as ripe, and by divisions.

  =Crocosmia.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in pans in a cold house as soon
    as possible after maturity. Also by offsets.

  =Crocus.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seed, sown as soon as ripe or early in spring,
    the choicer strains in pots or boxes, using a light, sandy soil,
    and afterwards placing them in a cold pit or frame; the
    more common varieties may be placed in a warm position
    outside in a seed bed. Sow thinly, so that the plants may
    grow two years in the seed pan or bed without lifting. By
    the corms. These may be lifted and replanted, allowing each
    in its turn to develop new corms below. The following year
    new corms, or cormels, are also formed by the side of the
    old corms. These old corms die away annually. Some species
    increase much more rapidly than others.

  =Crossandra=, Harrachia. _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by cuttings, which root freely at almost
    any time of the year, in bottom heat.

  =Crotalaria= (Rattle-Box). _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds. The shrubby kinds by young cuttings,
    which root freely in sand, under glass, in a cool house.

  =Croton.= See Codiæum.

  =Crowea.= _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds. Usually by green cuttings in a frame.

  =Crowfoot.= See Ranunculus.

  =Crucianella= (Crosswort). _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, by divisions during spring or autumn,
    and by cuttings.

  =Cryptomeria= (Japan Cedar). _Coniferæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings of growing wood planted
    in sandy soil, under glass.

  =Cryptostemma.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be sown on a gentle
    hot-bed in early spring.

  =Cubeba.= See Piper.

  =Cucumber= (_Cucumis sativus_). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds. If sown out-doors, the operation should be delayed
    until the weather is thoroughly settled.

  =Cucumber-tree.= See Magnolia.

  =Cunninghamia= (Broad-leaved China Fir). _Coniferæ._

    Increased by seeds and cuttings of growing wood.

  =Cuphea.= _Lythrarieæ._

    Increased easily by seed; but cuttings of the perennial
    sorts strike freely in March or April, in brisk bottom heat.

  =Cupressus= (Cypress). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds may be collected in early spring, and should be sown
    in April in a warm, friable soil. Cuttings of growing or mature
    wood, much as for Retinospora, which see.

  =Curculigo.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds; also by suckers, which form at the base of the stem.

  =Curcuma= (Tumeric). _Scitamineæ._

    Increased by root division.

  =Currant= (_Ribes rubrum_, _R. nigrum_ and _R. aureum_). _Saxifrageæ._

    New varieties are grown from seeds, which may be sown in
    the fall or stratified until spring. Varieties are nearly always
    multiplied by hard-wood cuttings (Fig. 49). The cuttings
    may be taken in spring and placed directly in the ground, but
    better results are obtained by taking them in the fall or late
    summer. Many nurserymen prefer to take them in August,
    strip off the leaves, and bury them in bunches with the butts
    up. They may remain in this condition or in a cellar all
    winter, or they may be planted in the fall. Currant cuttings
    strike readily, however, under any method. Some growers
    cut out the buds which come below the surface of the ground
    to prevent suckering, but this is not generally practiced; the
    suckers are cut off when the cuttings are removed from the
    cutting bed, either to be sold or to be transplanted into nursery
    rows. Green-layering is sometimes practiced with rare
    sorts, or single eyes may be used, as in grapes. Tip-layering,
    as in the black raspberry, may also be employed. (See
    page 33.) Weak or low sorts are sometimes grafted upon
    stronger ones, in order to give them a tree form, but such
    bushes are grown only as curiosities or as specimen plants.

  =Cussonia.= _Araliaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings, which should be planted in sand,
    under glass. Give slight bottom heat.

  =Custard Apple.= See Anona.

  =Cyananthus.= _Campanulaceæ._

    Seeds. Strong roots may be carefully divided in spring,
    but this is not desirable. Usually by cuttings, which should
    be taken during spring or early summer, and struck in sandy
    peat, being kept moist.

  =Cyanophyllum.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Increased by seed. By cuttings or eyes, which should be
    placed in sand where a good bottom heat must be maintained,
    and they should be shaded from the sun.

  =Cyanotis.= _Commelinaceæ._

    Seeds; usually by young cuttings in sandy soil, in brisk
    heat.

  =Cycas.= _Cycadaceæ._

    Increased by seed, and oftener by suckers.

  =Cyathea.= See Ferns.

  =Cyclamen= (Sowbread). _Primulaceæ._

    Propagated by seed, sown when freshly gathered; the
    hardy kinds in pots placed in a cool frame. By divisions
    and leaf cuttings, taken off with a heel; but these methods
    are not very satisfactory.

  =Cynoglossum.= _Boragineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions and root-cuttings.

  =Cypella.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seed, sown as soon as ripe in a cool house,
    and by offsets.

  =Cyperus.= _Cyperaceæ._

    Propagated either by seed, sown in gentle heat, or by
    divisions.

  =Cyphia.= _Campanulaceæ._

    When the stems begin to push out from the root, cut off as
    many of the shoots as are required, and place them in small
    pots in an equal mixture of loam, peat, and sand in abundance.
    The young plants should be kept dry until callused,
    but not covered with glass. They may also be increased by
    cuttings, under a hand-glass in a cool house.

  =Cyphomandra= (Tree Tomato of Jamaica). _Solanaceæ._

    Use seeds; or cuttings may be placed under glass, in bottom
    heat.

  =Cypress.= See Cupressus.

  =Cypripedium= (Lady's Slipper). _Orchideæ._

    By seeds sometimes. Usually by division. (See under
    Orchids.)

  =Cyrilla.= _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings.

  =Cyrtanthus.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by offsets.

  =Cytisus= (Scotch Broom). _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds and layers. In spring, cuttings of young wood
    may be taken when about three inches long (with a heel preferred),
    placed under a bell-glass in heat, or in a close frame,
    where they will root readily. If gradually hardened, potted
    and grown on, small flowering specimens may by obtained
    the following spring. _C. purpurea_ is usually grafted on the
    common laburnum.


  =Dacrydium= (Tear Tree). _Coniferæ._

    Increased by fresh seed and ripened cuttings.

  =Daffodil.= See Narcissus.

  =Dahlia.= _Compositæ._

    Single varieties, and sometimes the doubles, are grown
    from seeds. The roots may be broken apart after the crowns
    have started in spring, and each part grown separately. The
    roots may be started into growth in heat late in winter, and
    the young sprouts may be removed and handled as ordinary
    cuttings as fast as they form. Or rare sorts may be increased
    during summer by cuttings from the growing tips. Cions
    made of the growing tips may be grafted into the roots by a
    cleft or side graft. This method is oftenest employed for
    the purpose of preserving over winter rare sorts which it is
    feared may be lost. The grafts are kept growing slowly during
    winter, and cuttings may be taken from them. Cuttings
    should always have a bud or buds at the base, and in propagation
    by division there must be a piece of the crown attached
    to the root.

  =Daisy.= See Bellis.

  =Dalbergia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Place cuttings of firm young shoots in sand under a glass,
    in spring. Give a little bottom heat.

  =Dampiera.= _Goodenovieæ._

    Divisions. Cuttings should be planted in a mixture of
    turfy loam, peat and sand, in heat.

  =Dandelion= (_Taraxacum officinale_). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, in early spring.

  =Daphne.= _Thymelæaceæ._

    Seeds. For layers, remove the soil in spring to a depth
    of two or three inches about the plant, and fill with fine
    compost to within two inches of the tops of the shoots. The
    next spring, carefully wash away the compost, and plant the
    small white buds in pots of fine soil. Place in a cool frame.

    Cuttings should be made of matured shoots or side growths
    in autumn; insert thinly in well-drained pots of peaty soil,
    and cover with a bell-glass. If kept in a cool house in winter
    they will callus, and may, early in spring, be introduced
    to gentle heat, to encourage growth and the emission of roots.
    Pot the young plants singly, and grow on in a close but not
    high temperature, and afterwards harden and keep quite
    cool during the following autumn and winter, in order to
    thoroughly ripen the wood. Grafted specimens may be
    treated in a similar way. _D. odora_ is propagated by ripened
    cuttings in a cool house, in sand. Sometimes the old wood
    can be used. The time is determined by the fitness of the
    wood.

  =Darlingtonia.= _Sarraceniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by dividing the plants. Seeds may
    be sown on the surface of well-prepared fibrous soil, and
    then covered with dead sphagnum moss, rubbed through a
    sieve. Give shade.

  =Darwinia.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of the young roots. Place in a
    cold-frame.

  =Dasylirion.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, suckers and cuttings.

  =Date= (_Phœnix dactylifera_). _Palmæ._

    The seeds from commercial dates grow readily, and without
    the intervention of stratification. Special varieties are
    propagated by a sort of cutting, made by removing and rooting
    the sprouts which appear about the base of the tree.
    These root readily if taken off green and liberally supplied
    with water. They often begin to bear in five or six years.

  =Date Palm.= See Phœnix.

  =Datisca.= _Datisceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, and by dividing well established
    plants.

  =Datura=, including Brugmansia, Ceratocaulis and Stramonium.
    _Solanaceæ._

    The annual species are propagated by seeds, which are
    started under cover in the north. The perennials are readily
    grown from cuttings in mild heat. Heeled shoots are usually
    preferred.

  =Daubenya.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by offsets.

  =Davallia.= _Filices._

    Propagated largely by division. See Ferns.

  =Daviesia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seed may be sown in slight heat in spring. Cuttings may
    be made of firm young shoots, and placed in sand under a
    frame.

  =Day Lily.= See Hemerocallis.

  =Deciduous Cypress.= See Taxodium.

  =Decumaria.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings may be made in summer, and placed
    under a frame in a shady situation.

  =Delphinium= (Larkspur). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown out-doors in a warm border in spring,
    or in pans, to be placed either in frames or outside. The
    old plants of perennial sorts may be cut down after flowering,
    when young growths will proceed from the base, and the
    whole may be lifted and carefully divided. Cuttings of the
    young shoots, taken in autumn or spring, will root freely if
    potted singly and placed in a cold-frame. They will flower
    the following season at the same time as the divisions.

  =Dendrobium.= _Orchideæ._

    The methods of propagating these plants have already
    been mentioned. Where a rapid increase of a new or special
    variety is required, the pseudo-bulbs that are more than
    one year old should be cut into lengths, and fastened on orchid
    rafts, with a layer of sphagnum beneath them. Suspend
    them in a hot, moist house, if possible, over a water-tank.
    The advantage of this method is that the young plants
    do not need shifting after they commence rooting on their
    own account. The section to which _D. aggregatum_, _D. Jenkinsii_,
    _D. densiflorum_ and _D. thyrsiflorum_ belong, are best
    propagated by division. (See under Orchids.)

  =Dentaria= (Toothwort). _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions.

  =Deodar.= See Cedrus.

  =Desfontainea.= _Loganiaceæ._

    Cuttings, placed in a sandy loam, in a gentle heat.

  =Desmodium.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by cuttings placed under a frame,
    in heat.

  =Deutzia.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Commercially, the species are mostly propagated by green
    hardened cuttings in summer, under a frame. Hard-wooded
    cuttings may be taken in autumn, and be treated in about
    the same manner as currant cuttings (see page 58). The
    deutzias are also propagated by divisions and layers. Some
    of the dwarf sorts are sometimes forced, to make cuttings
    for winter use.

  =Dewberry= (_Rubus Canadensis_ and vars., and _Rubus trivialis_.)
    _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds are handled in the same manner as blackberry seeds.
    Increased by layers and, like the blackberry, by root-cuttings.
    Layers are made by simply covering the decumbent
    canes at the joints. This is the usual method of multiplication.
    The tips, too, root freely, as in the black-cap raspberries.

  =Dianella.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in gentle heat during spring.
    By divisions.

  =Dianthera.= See Justicia.

  =Dianthus.= See Carnation, Pink and Sweet William.

  =Dicentra=, Capnorchis, Diclytra (Bleeding Heart). _Papaveraceæ._

    The crowns may be divided in early spring, or cuttings
    may be made of the fleshy roots in short lengths, and placed
    in sand. The roots should be placed in a compost of sandy
    loam, in well-drained pots, as soon as the foliage dies off,
    and transferred to a cold-frame.

  =Dichorisandra.= _Commelinaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions and cuttings.

  =Dichosma.= See Agathosma.

  =Dicksonia.= _Filices._

    Division mostly. See Ferns.

  =Diclytra.= See Dicentra.

  =Dictamnus= (Dittany, or Fraxinella). _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds should be sown as soon as ripe. Division is used.

  =Dictyosperma.= See Areca.

  =Dicyrta.= See Achimenes.

  =Didymocarpus.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Cuttings, which are obtained from young shoots when
    commencing growth, and placed in sandy soil, in heat.
    Also by seeds.

  =Didymosperma.= See Areca.

  =Dieffenbachia.= See Caladium.

  =Diervilla=, Weigela. _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Suckers. Cuttings may be made in spring, summer or
    autumn. Hardened green cuttings, handled under a frame
    in summer, are extensively used by nurserymen. (See page
    58.) They are sometimes grown from cuttings in winter from
    forced plants. Hard-wood cuttings, made in winter and
    planted in spring like the grape, succeed well.

  =Digitalis= (Foxglove). _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring, either in-doors or in the open.
    The common foxglove (_D. purpurea_) often self-sows itself.

  =Dill= (_Arethum graveolens_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds, in early spring.

  =Dillenia=, including Colbertia. _Dilleniaceæ._

    Seeds, which, however, are grown with much difficulty.
    Cuttings of half-ripened wood may be placed in sand, under
    a frame, in bottom heat.

  =Dimorphotheca.= _Compositæ._

    The seeds of the annual sorts should be sown in heat in
    spring. The perennials are grown from green cuttings.

  =Dionæa.= _Droseraceæ._

    Propagated sometimes by seed; usually by dividing the
    plants.

  =Dion=, Platyzamia. _Cycadaceæ._

    Propagated by seed.

  =Dioscorea= (Yam). _Dioscoreaceæ._

    The tubers may be divided in autumn or spring, when not
    growing. Seeds are sometimes used, so are the tubers
    which form in the axils by the leaves. Stove species can be
    propagated by cuttings of the half-ripened wood.

  =Diosma.= _Rutaceæ._

    Cuttings in sandy peat, and under a frame placed in very
    gentle heat, will soon root.

  =Diospyros= (Date Plum, Persimmon). _Ebenaceæ._

    Seeds are used for the hardy species. Also by cuttings of
    half-ripened shoots. Those requiring stove heat strike best
    from ripened shoots, placed in sand in a brisk bottom heat
    during spring. See also Persimmon.

  =Dipcadi=, Uropetalum. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by offsets in spring.

  =Diplacus.= See Mimulus.

  =Dipladenia.= _Apocynaceæ._

    In spring, when the plants commence new growth, cuttings
    from the young shoots are made. These, or single eyes,
    should be placed in a mixture of sand and peat, in good
    bottom heat.

  =Diplazium.= See Ferns.

  =Diplothemium.= _Palmæ._

    Propagation is affected by seeds.

  =Dipteracanthus.= See Ruellia.

  =Dirca.= _Thymelæaceæ._

    Increased by seeds or layers.

  =Disa.= _Orchideæ._

    _D. grandiflora_ and others of similar habit are propagated
    by offsets. These are best taken off about December, and
    treated like the old plants. (See under Orchids.)

  =Disocactus.= See Phyllocactus.

  =Disporum=, including Prosartes. _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds may be used; or the plant may be divided in spring
    before active growth commences.

  =Dodecatheon=, Meadia (American Cowslip). _Primulaceæ._

    Seeds. The crowns may be divided either in spring or
    autumn. Cuttings of the whole root can be effectively used,
    the root being torn off the crown, planted upright, and of
    course covered with the sandy soil commonly used in this
    form of propagation.

  =Dog's Bane.= See Apocynum

  =Dog's-tooth Violet.= See Erythronium.

  =Dogwood.= See Cornus.

  =Dolichos.= _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds. Sometimes cuttage or layerage is resorted to.

  =Dorcoceras.= See Bæa.

  =Doronicum=, including Aronicum (Leopard's Bane). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions.

  =Dorstenia.= _Urticaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown in a hot-bed in early spring. Before
    active growth commences the plants may be divided.

  =Doryanthes.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by suckers placed in small pots.

  =Dorycnium=, including Boujeania. _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds.

  =Downingia=, Clintonia. _Campanulaceæ._

    Seeds should be sown in mild heat in spring.

  =Draba=, including Petrocallis (Whitlow Grass). _Cruciferæ._

    The annuals or biennials propagated by seeds sown in
    spring in the open border. The perennials may be propagated
    by dividing the crowns.

  =Dracæna= (Dragon-tree). _Liliaceæ._

    Rarely grown from seed. Layers do not succeed very
    well. The stems of old plants may be cut up in pieces one
    or two inches long, and placed at any season in cocoanut
    fiber or light soil, in the bottom heat of a propagating house.
    The tops of the plants will also strike as cuttings, and the
    fleshy base of the stem is sometimes removed and used for
    propagation. Root-cuttings do well in a moderate heat.
    (See Fig. 47.)

  =Dracocephalum= (Dragon's Head). _Labiatæ._

    The annuals are grown from seeds, sown in the open in
    spring. Perennials are increased by dividing the roots, or
    by cuttings of the young shoots in spring.

  =Dracontium.= See Amorphophallus.

  =Dragon's Head.= See Dracocephalum.

  =Dragon-tree.= See Dracæna.

  =Drimys=, Wintera. _Magnoliaceæ._

    Cuttings made of half-ripened shoots should be inserted
    in a frame.

  =Drosera= (Sundew). _Droseraceæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as possible after gathering. _D. binata_
    is increased by cutting roots from strong plants into
    pieces of one-half or one inch in length, and placing them on
    the surface of shallow earthenware pans, in sandy peat soil,
    and covering about one-half inch deep with the same material.
    They are then placed under a bell-glass, and transferred
    to a damp, warm propagating house.

  =Drosophyllum.= _Droseraceæ._

    Propagated by seed.

  =Dutchman's Pipe.= See Aristolochia.

  =Duvaua.= _Anacardiaceæ._

    Insert cuttings made of the ripe wood under glass, in gentle
    heat.

  =Dyckia.= _Bromeliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, suckers and divisions.

  =Eccremocarpus= (Calampelis). _Bignoniaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring, in a gentle heat. Cuttings may be
    used, of green or ripe wood.

  =Echeveria.= See Cotyledon.

  =Echinacea.= _Compositæ._

    Readily propagated by seeds and division.

  =Echinocactus.= See Cactus.

  =Echinops=, Echinanthus (Globe Thistle). _Compositæ._

    Sow the seeds in spring for the propagation of the biennials,
    and divide the perennials early. Also by root-cuttings.

  =Echium= (Viper's Bugloss). _Boragineæ._

    The herbaceous species are raised from seeds. Also increased
    by divisions. The shrubby sorts are increased more
    readily by layers, but also by cuttings, placed in sandy soil
    under glass.

  =Edelweiss.= See Leontopodium.

  =Edgeworthia.= _Thymelæaceæ._

    Cuttings should be inserted in sandy soil, under glass in
    spring.

  =Edwandria.= _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds or cuttings of the young wood.

  =Egg-Plant= (_Solanum Melongena_). _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds in heat, in late winter or spring. Cuttings rarely.

  =Eglantine.= See Rosa.

  =Ehretia.= _Boragineæ._

    Place cuttings in sandy soil under glass in bottom heat,
    in spring.

  =Eichhornia.= _Pontederiaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by division in spring; seeds.

  =Elæagnus= (Oleaster, Wild Olive, Goumi). _Elæagnaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, layers or cuttings. The named varieties
    are often grafted on the most vigorous varieties obtainable.
    Imported seeds of some species are apt to be empty.
    _E. longipes_ can readily be propagated by cuttings of the half-ripened
    wood in June and July, under glass.

  =Elæis= (Oil Palm). _Palmæ._

    Seeds are used for propagation.

  =Elæocarpus=, including Monocera. _Tiliaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown in a hot-bed. Make cuttings of ripened
    shoots, with leaves on, and place them in sandy soil,
    in bottom heat.

  =Elder.= See Sambucus.

  =Elecampane= (_Inula Helenium_). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds in open air in early spring.

  =Elliottia.= _Ericaceæ._

    Insert soft wood cuttings in sand under glass.

  =Elm.= See Ulmus.

  =Elodea.= See Hypericum.

  =Empetrum= (Crowberry or Crakeberry). _Empetraceæ._

    Seeds. In summer, cuttings may be made, and should be
    placed in sandy soil under glass.

  =Encephalartos.= _Cycadaceæ._

    Increased by seeds.

  =Endive= (_Cichorium Endivia_). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, either in the open where the plants are to stand,
    or under glass.

  =Enkianthus.= _Ericaceæ._

    Cuttings made of the ripe wood should be placed under
    glass during the spring months, without heat.

  =Entelea.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, in sandy soil.

  =Eomecon.= _Papaveraceæ._

    Seeds; also by division.

  =Epacris.= _Epacrideæ._

    Grown from tip cuttings in a frame in winter, with bottom
    heat. The cuttings root very slowly.

  =Ephedra.= _Gnetaceæ._

    Layers may be made from young shoots or branches.

  =Epidendrum.= _Orchideæ._

    The tall-stemmed section of this genus is increased by cuttings,
    the section with short, thick pseudo-bulbs by division.
    The former also occasionally produce viviparous flower-scapes,
    thus affording a ready means of increase. (See under
    Orchids.)

  =Epigæa.= _Ericaceæ._

    Increased with great difficulty by careful divisions of established
    plants, and by layers. Seeds, when obtainable, can
    be used, but are slow to develop.

  =Epilobium= (Willow-herb). _Onagrarieæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions or root-cuttings.

  =Epimedium= (Barrenwort). _Berberideæ._

    Sometimes increased by seeds. During July or August,
    divisions of the roots can be made.

  =Epiphyllum.= _Cacteæ._

    Readily grown from cuttings. Pieces of the branches four
    to six inches long are placed in sandy soil in gentle heat, and
    kept moderately dry. Epiphyllums are often grafted on
    strong stocks of pereskia (_Pereskia aculeata_ is commonly
    used, but _P. Bleo_ is equally as good), for the purpose of getting
    high or rafter plants. A young shoot is cleft-grafted
    into any portion of the pereskia which has become hard, and
    the cion is held in place by a cactus spine passed through it.
    Several cions may be inserted along the sides of the stock.

  =Eranthemum.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings root readily in spring in peaty soil, in a
    close frame where there is a bottom heat of about 70°.

  =Eranthis= (Winter Aconite). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and division.

  =Eremostachys.= _Labiatæ._

    May be increased by seeds or division.

  =Eremurus.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions.

  =Erica= (Heath). _Ericaceæ._

    Will grow from seeds, but these are used generally to
    secure new varieties. Commonly propagated by very short
    cuttings, taken from the tips, or made of the lower young
    growth. Carefully remove the leaves from the lower parts of
    the cutting, which should be about one inch long, and then
    insert rather closely in pots, which should be filled two-thirds
    with crocks, the remainder being fine sandy peat with a layer
    of clean, compact sand on the surface. Cover with glass.
    Water well, and place in a temperature of about 60°.

  =Erigeron=, including Phalacroloma, Polyactidium. _Compositæ._

    Readily increased by seeds or divisions.

  =Erinus.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds and divisions. After becoming established, they
    propagate themselves by seed.

  =Eriobotrya.= See Photinia.

  =Eriodendron.= _Malvaceæ._

    Raised from seeds sown in sandy soil, in heat.

  =Eriogonum.= _Polygonaceæ._

    May be increased by seed or division.

  =Eriosema.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds or cuttings.

  =Eriostemon.= _Rutaceæ._

    Cuttings, in sandy peat in spring, under glass, and with
    gentle heat. Nurserymen propagate by grafting on small
    stocks of correa.

  =Erodium= (Heron's Bill). _Geraniaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds or divisions.

  =Erpetion= (Australian Violet). _Violarieæ._

    Propagated by seeds; also by division and cuttings.

  =Eryngium= (Eryngo). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds or carefully made divisions may be used for increasing
    the species.

  =Erysimum= (Hedge Mustard). _Cruciferæ._

    Increased by seeds; the perennials by seeds and divisions.

  =Erythræa=, Gyrandra, Hippocentaurea (Centaury). _Gentianeæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions.

  =Erythrina= (Coral-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Young shoots can be taken in spring or early summer
    with a heel, and placed in sandy soil, on a slight bottom
    heat.

  =Erythronium= (Dog's-tooth Violet). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Offsets or bulbels are usually employed, taken as
    soon as the leaves dry away after flowering, inserting the
    bulbels about three inches deep.

  =Erythroxylon=, including Sethia. _Lineæ._

    Place cuttings of half-ripened shoots in sand under a
    glass, in heat.

  =Escallonia.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Suckers, layers. Cuttings of half-ripened wood strike in
    sand, when covered with glass. Also by seeds.

  =Escheria.= See Gloxinia.

  =Eschscholtzia=, Chryseis (California Poppy). _Papaveraceæ._

    Seeds may be sown in spring or autumn where the plants
    are to flower.

  =Eucalyptus= (Gum-tree). _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown thinly in pans
    or pots of light, sandy soil, and placed in frames. Also by
    cuttings.

  =Eucharis.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds may be sown as soon as ripe in a warm house. Offsets
    or bulbels should be removed and potted off singly.

  =Eucomis.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown as soon as ripe, or by bulbels.

  =Eucryphia.= _Rosaceæ._

    The cuttings of young shoots are planted in sand under
    glass.

  =Eugenia.= See Myrtus.

  =Eulalia.= _Gramineæ._

    Freely increased by seed or division.

  =Euonymus= (Burning-bush, Strawberry-tree, Wahoo). _Celastrineæ._

    Grown from seeds, cuttings and layers. Cuttings usually
    make better plants than layers. The deciduous species are
    usually grown from hard-wood cuttings, but the evergreen
    kinds are started under glass, from cuttings of the growing
    or ripened wood. The small and weak kinds are grafted on
    the stronger ones. The evergreen species will grow upon
    the deciduous kinds.

  =Eupatorium.= _Compositæ._

    Cuttings of the growing wood, under glass in early spring,
    is the common method of propagation. Seeds can also be
    used for some species.

  =Euphorbia=, including Poinsettia (Spurge). _Euphorbiaceæ._

    By seeds, especially the annual species. The perennial
    shrubby sorts are increased by cuttings in a strong heat.
    Some species are propagated by divisions.

  =Eurya.= _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Propagated by soft cuttings, inserted in sand under a glass
    in heat.

  =Eurycles.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Offsets or bulbels, in spring.

  =Eurybia.= See Olearia.

  =Eustylis.= See Nemastylis.

  =Euterpe.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds in heat.

  =Eutoca.= See Phacelia.

  =Evening Primrose.= See Œnothera.

  =Exacum.= _Gentianeæ._

    Seeds should be sown in spring, in bottom heat.

  =Exochorda.= _Rosaceæ._

    Grown from seeds, layers, cuttings and suckers. Seeds
    are difficult to procure. Layering in June is a common practice.
    Various kinds of cuttings are employed, but the best
    results follow short, soft cuttings, taken from forced plants
    and set deep in shallow flats of sand. They require a very
    strong bottom heat, a close frame, and the water should be
    applied in a spray upon the foliage. Cuttings are sometimes
    grafted upon pieces of roots. It is regarded as a difficult
    plant to propagate.


  =Fabiana.= _Solanaceæ._

    Readily increased by seeds and cuttings.

  =Fagus= (Beech). _Cupuliferæ._

    Commonly grown from the nuts, which should be stratified
    and sown very early in spring. They may be sown immediately
    after they are gathered, if they can be protected from
    vermin. The named varieties are grafted upon the European
    or American species.

  =Fair Maids of France.= See Ranunculus.

  =Fan-palm.= See Livistona.

  =Farfugium.= See Senecio.

  =Fedia.= See Patrinia.

  =Felicia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings inserted in sandy soil,
    under a glass.

  =Fennel= (_Fœniculum_, various species). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds, usually in spring.

  =Fennel Flower.= See Nigella.

  =Fenugreek= (_Trigonella Fœnum-Græcum_). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Fenzlia.= See Gilia.

  =Ferns.= _Filices._

    Where division is possible, it is the easiest and most economical
    method of propagation, and should be practiced just
    before the plant starts into growth. The spores can be sown
    in February and March, or earlier, under glass in a warm
    propagating pit. Partly fill a suitable sized pot or pan with
    coarse peat, giving plenty of drainage; make the surface
    level, and on this place three-quarter inch cubes of well-seasoned
    peat which is rather dry, watering the whole and
    scattering on the spores evenly. Cover with a pane of glass,
    and place in a partial shade. While the process which corresponds
    to germination is going on, great care must be given
    to the water supply. This is sometimes done by placing the
    pots or pans in a saucer, from which they can suck the water
    up. Overhead watering may be used, and often is, but will
    sometimes introduce worms and the like.

    The young plants should be pricked out when the true leaf
    appears, and they are large enough to handle. The same
    careful treatment should be continued until they are established
    in pots.

    There is not much difficulty in getting the young plants,
    if fresh spores are obtainable, but there is a good deal of
    trouble in handling the seedlings, and establishing them in
    their growing quarters.

    Most ferns are readily propagated by means of spores, as
    directed above and on page 24. Some species rarely produce
    spores in cultivation, however, and in other cases, as in some
    tree ferns, it is almost impossible to rear the young plants after
    the spores have germinated. In all such cases, recourse must
    be had to separation, division or layerage. There are some
    species, as _Asplenium bulbiferum_, _Cystopteris bulbifera_ and
    others, which bear small bulblets or detachable buds on their
    fronds. These buds often vegetate while still attached to the
    frond. They may be removed either before or after showing
    signs of vegetation, and set in pots in a close propagating
    frame, or under a bell-glass. Ferns which make broad
    crowns may be divided, and this is the common mode with
    many species. Some species produce creeping root-stocks,
    which emit roots if pegged down into a pot of soil or on a block
    of peat. Several plants can often be produced from such a
    layer. All these operations are best performed in late winter,
    before the new growth begins. The tree ferns are rarely
    propagated to any extent in cultivation, but young plants are
    imported from their native countries.

  =Fern, Sweet.= See Comptonia.

  =Ferraria=, Tigridia. _Irideæ._

    Propagated by means of seeds and bulbels.

  =Feverfew.= See Chrysanthemum.

  =Ficus.= _Urticaceæ._

    The greenhouse species are propagated by layers and cuttings.
    The cuttings are handled in a close frame, and a leaf
    or two is usually left on them. For _Ficus Carica_, see Fig.
    Propagation by seeds is sometimes used in the edible figs,
    but is not easy with the ornamental sorts. _F. elastica_, _F.
    Indica_, etc., are increased by cuttings, planted in sand or
    sandy soil, and placed in good bottom heat, in a frame under
    glass. The large cuttings should be staked, and care must
    be taken to remove the milky juice before planting. Any
    winter month is good, before growth begins. Last season's
    wood should be used.

  =Fig= (_Ficus Carica_). _Urticaceæ._

    Figs grow readily from the plump seeds in the commercial
    fruit. Wash out the seeds, and those that sink may be sown
    in a frame. The young plants will appear in three or four
    weeks. In from three to five years the plants will begin to
    bear. New varieties are obtained in this way.

    Varieties of the fig are multiplied with ease by layers,
    suckers and cuttings. Make cuttings of mature wood in autumn,
    cutting just below a bud. Scarce varieties may be
    multiplied by single eye cuttings. Fig cuttings are handled
    in the same way as grape cuttings. Some prefer, however,
    to place the cuttings where the tree is to stand. A well-grown
    plant will bear at two or three years of age.

    The fig is readily budded and grafted, but these methods
    are seldom employed, because the plant is so easily multiplied
    by cuttings. Shield, ring or tubular buddings are employed.
    Various methods of grafting are adapted to it, and
    cleft-grafting is usually employed on old plants.

  =Filbert.=. See Corylus.

  =Fir.= See Abies, Pinus and Picea.

  =Fire-pink.= See Silene.

  =Fittonia.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Increased by division, and by cuttings of half-ripened
    shoots, planted in sandy loam, in bottom heat.

  =Fitzroya.= _Coniferæ._

    Seeds. Increased also by cuttings of half-ripened shoots

  =Flax.= See Linum.

  =Flower-de-Luce= (_Fleur-de-Lis_). See Iris.

  =Fontanesia.= _Oleaceæ._

    Layers are used; also cuttings, planted under a hand-glass
    in autumn. Or it may be grafted on the privet.

  =Forget-me-not.= See Myosotis.

  =Forsythia= (Golden Bell). _Oleaceæ._

    Propagated extensively by green cuttings in summer, in a
    frame; also grown from ripe cuttings taken in fall and winter,
    and planted in the open air in early spring.

  =Fothergilla.= _Hamamelideæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown in spring in a peaty soil; by
    layers.

  =Four-o'clock.= See Mirabilis.

  =Foxglove.= See Digitalis.

  =Fragaria.= See Strawberry.

  =Franciscea.= See Brunfelsia.

  =Francoa.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds, sown in early spring in a cool frame. Also by
    division.

  =Frangula.= See Rhamnus.

  =Frankenia=, including Beatsonia, Hypericopsis. _Frankeniaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions.

  =Fraxinella.= See Dictamnus.

  =Fraxinus= (Ash). _Oleaceæ._

    Propagated chiefly by seeds, which should be stratified.
    The named sorts are budded upon seedling stocks if the sorts
    are upright growers, or top-grafted if they are weepers. Both
    the European and American species are used for stocks.

  =Freesia.= _Irideæ._

    Increased readily by seed, sown as soon as ripe in pots of
    light, sandy soil, and placed in a sunny position, in a cool
    frame. By bulbels.

  =Fremontia.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds may be used; or cuttings, in spring, may be struck
    under a hand-glass.

  =French Bean= (Varieties of _Phaseolus vulgaris_ and _P. nanus_).
    _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Freycinetia.= _Pandaneæ._

    Increased by offsets.

  =Fringe-tree.= See Chionanthus.

  =Fritillaria.= _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as ripe where the plants are to stand
    the first year. Bulbels and division.

  =Fuchsia= (Ladies' Ear Drop). _Onagrariæ._

    Fuchsias grow readily from seeds, which should be sown
    as soon as ripe, and blooming plants ought to be obtained in
    eight or ten months. Cuttings of the young growth strike
    quickly and easily. Blooming plants of most sorts can be
    obtained in four or five months.

  =Fumaria= (Fumitory). _Papaveraceæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Funkia=, Hosta (Plantain Lily, White Day Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by dividing the stools during the
    early autumn, or when they begin to start in spring. Only
    strong, healthy clumps should be divided, and each portion
    should contain several crowns.

  =Furze.= See Ulex.


  =Gaillardia.= _Compositæ._

    The annual sorts are propagated by seeds started under
    glass; the perennial kinds by seeds, cuttings or division.
    Sometimes root-cuttings are used.

  =Galanthus= (Snowdrop). _Amaryllideæ._

    Commonly by bulbels. Rarely by seeds.

  =Galax=, Erythrorhiza, Solonandra. _Diapensiaceæ._

    Propagated by divisions of strong clumps in autumn.

  =Galega= (Goat's Rue). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, in spring; also by division.

  =Galtonia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by bulbels or seeds.

  =Garcinia=, Cambogia, Mangostana, Oxycarpus. _Guttiferæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of ripened shoots should be inserted in
    sand under a glass, in strong bottom heat.

  =Gardenia=, including Rothmannia. _Rubiaceæ._

    Strong, healthy cuttings may be taken with a heel, early
    in the year being the best time, but any season will do when
    suitable cuttings can be secured. They should be placed in
    bottom heat of about 75°, in a frame.

  =Garlic= (_Allium sativum_). _Liliaceæ._

    By "cloves" or divisions of the bulb. In the north these
    are planted in the spring, but in warm climates they may be
    planted in the fall.

  =Garrya=, including Fadyenia. _Cornaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings of half-ripened wood
    in sandy loam in August, and shaded until rooted. Also by
    budding on _Aucuba Japonica_ at the crown. Plant sufficiently
    deep to cover the bud or graft.

  =Gasteria.= See Aloe.

  =Gaultheria= (Boyberry, Wintergreen). _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, divisions, layers and cuttings under
    glass.

  =Gaura.= _Onagrarieæ._

    Seeds should be sown in spring or fall in the open ground.

  =Gaylussacia.= See Vaccinium.

  =Gazania=, Mœhnia, Mussinia. _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions. Make cuttings in July
    or August, from the side shoots near the base of the plant;
    these should be placed in a sandy soil, in a frame.

  =Gelsemium=, Leptopteris, Medicia. _Loganiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings under glass.

  =Genista.= See Cytisus.

  =Gentiana= (Gentian). _Gentianeæ._

    Seeds and division. The seeds germinate slowly, and often
    with difficulty. They often lie dormant a year or more.
    They should be sown in well-sifted light loam, in pans or
    flats, and kept cool and shaded. Division must be carefully
    done, or the plants will suffer.

  =Geonoma.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds and suckers.

  =Geranium.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Mostly by seeds and divisions. For the conservatory
    plants known as geraniums, see Pelargonium.

  =Gerardia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated, but often with difficulty, by seeds, sown in
    the open air or in a frame or cool house.

  =Gesnera.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds, and cuttings of the shoots and leaves. Handled in
    essentially the same manner as Gloxinia, which see.

  =Gethyllis.= _Amaryllideæ._

    They may be increased by bulbels or seeds.

  =Geum=, including Sieversia (Avens). _Rosaceæ._

  =Gherkin.= See Cucumber.

    Propagation is effected by seeds or division.

  =Gilia=, including Fenzlia. _Polemoniaceæ._

    Seeds should be sown in spring in the open ground or
    frame, in a rather light soil.

  =Gilibertia.= _Araliaceæ._

    Cuttings, inserted in sand in a gentle heat.

  =Gillenia.= _Rosaceæ._

    Increased readily by dividing the roots in spring; also by
    seeds.

  =Gilliesia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by bulbels.

  =Gilliflower.= See Matthiola.

  =Ginkgo=, Salisburia (Maidenhair-tree). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds, which are mostly imported, and which should be
    stratified. Also by layers, and by cuttings of either green or
    ripe wood. The cuttings are handled under glass. Named
    varieties are grafted upon common stocks.

  =Ginseng.= See Aralia.

  =Gladiolus.= _Irideæ._

    Seeds, which are commonly sown in pans in spring, in the
    house; or they may be sown in the border. Seedlings flower
    in two or three years. The common method of propagation
    is by means of cormels (see page 29, and Fig. 16). These are
    removed from the parent corm and planted in the open,
    where some of them will flower the same season, although
    most of them will require a season's independent growth before
    they flower. If cormels are desired in abundance, the
    large corms should not be allowed to flower. Some varieties
    do not produce cormels readily, and these may be made to
    bear them by cutting or ringing (page 30). A new corm is
    formed above the old one each year (Fig. 16).

  =Glastonbury-thorn.= See Cratægus.

  =Gleditschia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds should be sown in spring about one inch deep.
    They should be soaked in hot water before being sown. Varieties
    propagated by grafts upon seedling stock.

  =Gleichenia.= See Ferns.

  =Globe Flower.= See Trollius.

  =Globularia.= _Selagineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, division or cuttings.

  =Gloriosa=, Clynostylis, Methonica. _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds should be inserted singly in small pots, in a light
    sandy soil, and plunged in bottom heat. Bulbels, which
    should be carefully removed from the old bulbs when starting
    them in spring, as the roots are very brittle.

  =Gloxinia=, Escheria, Salisia. _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds should be sown the latter part of winter, in well-drained
    pots or small pans of finely sifted soil, of peat, leaf-mould
    and sand in about equal proportions. The seeds
    should be sown thinly and covered slightly, then carefully
    watered, and placed in a temperature of about 70° and kept
    shaded. Cuttings of the shoots may be taken when the old
    tubers are starting in spring, and placed in a close propagating
    frame. Leaf-cuttings, with a small portion of the petiole
    attached, give excellent results, especially when the leaves
    are firm and nearly matured. Leaf cuttings are made in the
    various ways in which begonia leaf-cuttings are made (see
    pp. 60-72, Figs. 59, 60). Also grafted (see page 88).

  =Glycine.= See Wistaria.

  =Glycosmis.= _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds. Increased by cuttings, which are commonly inserted
    in sand under glass, often in heat.

  =Glycyrrhiza=, including Liquiritia (Liquorice). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by division and by seeds.

  =Godetia.= See Œnothera.

  =Golden Rod.= See Solidago.

  =Goldfussia.= See Strobilanthus.

  =Gomphia= (Button Flower). _Ochnaceæ._

    Cuttings of firm young shoots should be placed in sand
    under glass, in heat.

  =Gomphocarpus.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Seeds should be sown under glass in spring; or cuttings
    may be made of small side shoots when the plant is commencing
    new growth, and placed in sand under glass.

  =Gompholobium.= _Leguminosæ._

    Cuttings, which should be made of young shoots during
    spring, and placed under glass.

  =Gomphrena.= See Celosia.

  =Gonolobus.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Seeds, divisions, and cuttings under glass.

  =Goodenia.= _Goodenovieæ._

    Seed. During spring, cuttings will root freely if placed
    under glass.

  =Goodia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds may be used. Cuttings of young shoots may be
    made during spring, and placed in a frame.

  =Gooseberry= (_Ribes Grossularia_ and _R. oxyacanthoides_).
    _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds, for the raising of new varieties, should be sown as
    soon as well cured, in loamy or sandy soil, or they may be
    stratified and sown together with the sand in the spring.
    Cuttings six to eight inches long of the mature wood, inserted
    two-thirds their length, usually grow readily, especially if
    taken in August or September and stored during winter, in
    the same way as currant cuttings. Single eye cuttings may
    be used for rare kinds. Stronger plants are usually obtained
    by layers, and the English varieties are nearly always layered
    in this country. Mound-layering is usually employed,
    the English varieties being allowed to remain in layerage two
    years, but the American varieties only one (Fig. 21). Layered
    plants are usually set in nursery rows for a year after removal
    from the stools. Green-layering during summer is sometimes
    practiced for new or rare varieties. Strong plants may also
    be procured by tip-layering, as in the black raspberry (see
    p. 33). If it is desired to train the weaker gooseberries in
    tree form, they may be grafted upon the stronger-growing
    varieties.

  =Gordonia=, including Polyspora. _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or layers.

  =Gorse.= See Ulex.

  =Goumi.= See Elæagnus.

  =Gourds= (_Cucurbita Pepo_, _Lagenaria_, etc.). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, after the weather is settled and ground is warm.

  =Grammanthes.= _Crassulaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring in a warm house.

  =Granadilla= (_Passiflora edulis_, etc.). _Passifloreæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or, less easily, by cuttings.

  =Grape= (_Vitis_, several species). _Vitaceæ._

    Grape seedlings are very easily grown. If the ground is
    fit and there is no danger from vermin, the seeds may be
    sown in the fall, but they are usually stratified and sown in
    spring. They come readily if sown out-doors, but some prefer
    to force them under glass with a mild bottom heat.
    Seedlings do not "come true," and they are therefore grown
    only for the purpose of obtaining new sorts.

    The grape is very readily multiplied by layers, either of
    the ripe or green-wood. The ripe wood or canes may be
    layered either in fall or spring, but spring is usually chosen.
    The cane is simply covered up two or three inches deep, and
    nearly every bud will produce a plant. In August or September
    the layer should be lifted and cut up into plants.
    Better plants are obtained if only the strongest canes are
    used and only a part of the buds on each are allowed to
    grow. The cane is usually cut back to four or five buds, or
    if very strong plants are desired only one bud is left on each
    layer. Canes of the previous year, those recently matured,
    are preferred, although wood two or three years old may be
    used, but in this case it is usually necessary to cut or otherwise
    wound the joint in order to induce the formation of
    roots. Vines or stools grown for the production of layers
    should be cut back severely in fall or winter, to induce a vigorous
    growth of canes the following season. These canes
    are then layered the succeeding fall or spring. Only a part of
    the canes are layered from any stool, a part being allowed to
    grow for cutting back the next fall in order to get another
    crop of canes. In some varieties which do not strike readily
    from cuttings, layering is considerably practiced by nurserymen.
    The Delaware is often grown in this way. Extra
    strong layers can be secured by layering in pots. A large
    pot, filled with rich soil, is plunged beneath the layer. In
    this manner a layer may be rooted and separated even while
    carrying fruit. Layering in pots is employed only in special
    cases.

    Green-layering is sometimes practiced upon new and scarce
    varieties, but strong plants are not obtained unless they are
    well handled by forceful culture after they are separated.
    The growing cane is layered in mid-summer, usually by
    serpentine layering.

    Cuttings are usually employed by nurserymen to propagate
    the grape. These are made in many fashions. In all
    ordinary cases hard-wood cuttings are made from the ripened
    canes in autumn or winter when the vines are pruned. It is
    advisable to take the cuttings before the canes have been
    exposed to great cold. Select only those canes which are
    well-matured, solid and rather short-jointed. In common
    practice, the cuttings are cut into two-bud length, the lower
    cut being made close to the bud. The cuttings will range
    from six to ten inches in length. Some prefer three-bud
    cuttings (Fig. 43), but unless the cane is very short-jointed
    such cuttings are too long to be planted and handled economically.
    Three-bud cuttings usually give stronger plants the
    first season because roots start from both joints as a rule.
    Very strong plants are obtained from mallet cuttings (Fig.
    45), but as only one such cutting can be made from a cane,
    unless the cane bears very strong branches, they are not
    much used. Various methods of peeling, slitting and slicing
    cuttings are recommended, in order to extend the callusing
    process but they are not used in common or commercial
    practice. The cuttings are tied in bundles of 50 or 100, and
    stored in sand, moss, or sawdust in a cellar, until spring,
    when they are planted in rows in the open. Some varieties,
    of which the Delaware is an example, do not strike
    readily from cuttings. Some growers start common cuttings
    of these under glass in spring. Others bury the bundles of
    cuttings in a warm exposure in the fall, with the butt ends up
    and about level with the surface of the ground. This
    affords bottom heat to the butts and induces callusing. At
    the approach of cold weather the cuttings are removed to a
    cellar, or are heavily mulched and allowed to remain where
    buried. Storing is safer. Some growers obtain the same
    results by burying upside down in a cellar. These slow-rooting
    sorts often start well if they are simply kept in a
    warm cellar--but where the buds will not swell--all winter,
    as the callusing is then hastened. At the end of the first
    season the plants may be transplanted. The plants are
    often sold at this age, but buyers usually prefer two-year-old
    plants.

    Single bud or "eye" cuttings are largely used for the
    newer and rarer varieties. These are cut from the canes in
    the fall, the same as long cuttings, and are stored in boxes of
    sand or moss. A month before the weather becomes settled,
    these boxes may be taken into a house or greenhouse, or put
    in a mild hot-bed, to induce the formation of the callus.
    They may then be planted out-doors, and a fair proportion of
    most varieties may be expected to grow. The best and commonest
    way of handling eyes, however, is to start them
    under glass. They are planted horizontally or nearly so and
    about an inch deep in sand or sandy earth in a cool greenhouse
    in late winter--in February in the northern states--and
    in about six weeks the plants will be large enough to pot
    off or to transplant into cold-frames or a cool house. If
    only a few plants are to be grown they may be started in
    pots. When the weather is thoroughly settled, they are
    transferred to nursery rows, and by fall they will make fine
    plants. There are various ways recommended for the cutting
    of these eyes--as cutting the ends obliquely up or
    down, shaving off the bark below the bud, and so on--but
    the advantages of these fashions are imaginary. A good
    eye-cutting is shown in Fig. 50. The foreign grapes are
    propagated by eyes in the north.

    Soft cuttings are sometimes used to multiply new kinds.
    These may be taken in summer from the growing canes, but
    the plants are usually forced during winter for the purpose
    of giving extra wood. Cuttings are taken off as fast as buds
    form during the winter, and they are forced in close frames
    with a good bottom heat. The cuttings may comprise two
    buds, with the leaf at the upper one allowed to remain,
    or they may bear but a single eye, in which case the leaf, or
    the most of it, is left on. This rapid multiplication from
    small, soft wood usually gives poor plants; but strong plants
    may be obtained by allowing the wood to become well
    hardened before it is used. Soft cuttings will root in two or
    three weeks under good treatment.

    In order to secure extra strong plants from single buds,
    the eyes may be saddle-grafted or whip-grafted upon a root
    two or three inches long. The root-grafts are then treated
    in the same way as eye cuttings, only that they are usually
    grown in pots from the start.

    The vine may be grafted with ease by any method. Cleft-grafting
    is commonly employed upon old plants. The cions
    are inserted on the crown of the plant, three or four inches
    below the surface of the ground. The cleft is bound with
    string and then covered with earth, no wax being necessary.
    Young plants are usually whip-grafted at the crown, either
    in-doors or out-doors. Grafting the vine is mostly confined
    to Europe, California, and other countries where the European
    grape (_Vitis vinifera_) is grown, as that species must be
    grafted upon some other stock in order to resist the phylloxera.
    The common wild frost-grape (_Vitis riparia_) is the most
    popular stock. The union in these cases must be two or
    three inches above the ground, to prevent the cion from taking
    root. The union is wound with waxed muslin, and the
    earth is heaped about it until it has healed. Grafting may
    be done out-doors in winter or spring. In the north, winter
    grafts are likely to be heaved by frosts, and late spring grafts,
    made as the leaves are pushing, are probably best.

    The vine is frequently inarched, and early in spring it can
    be budded by ordinary methods.

    Seed-grafting is a curious practice, which may be applied
    to the grape (see page 90).

  =Grape Hyacinth.= See Muscari.

  =Graptophyllum=, Earlia. _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Increased by cuttings of rather firm young shoots
    placed in a frame with some heat.

  =Gratiola=, Sophronanthe (Hedge Hyssop). _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds. Propagated readily by dividing the roots in spring.

  =Grevillea.= _Proteaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sown under glass in February; also
    by cuttings of half-ripened wood.

  =Grewia=, Chadara, Mallococca. _Tiliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings may be struck in sand under glass, with
    heat.

  =Grindelia.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown in the border or under a frame. Divisions.
    Cuttings.

  =Ground-Cherry.= See Physalis.

  =Ground-Nut.= See Apios; also Pea-nut.

  =Groundsel.= See Senecio.

  =Guaiacum.= _Zygophylleæ._

    Ripened cuttings in spring, under a hand-glass, in heat.

  =Guava= (_Psidium_, several species). _Myrtaceæ._

    The guavas grow readily from seeds, and plants will often
    bloom when a year and a half old. They may also be multiplied
    by layers, and by cuttings either under glass or in the
    open.

  =Guelder Rose.= See Viburnum.

  =Guernsey Lily.= See Nerine.

  =Gumbo.= See Hibiscus.

  =Gum, Sweet.= See Liquidambar.

  =Gum-tree.= See Eucalyptus.

  =Gunnera.= _Halorageæ._

    Propagated by division. It is very difficult to raise from
    seed.

  =Gustavia=, Pirigara. _Myrtaceæ._

    Cuttings, made of ripened shoots and handled in a frame.

  =Gymnema.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Make cuttings of firm side shoots in spring, and place in a
    frame.

  =Gymnocladus= (Kentucky Coffee-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Readily increased by seeds, which start better if soaked for
    a few hours in hot water. Also by root-cuttings.

  =Gymnogramme.= See Ferns.

  =Gymnyostachys.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagation is effected by suckers and divisions.

  =Gynerium= (Pampas Grass). _Gramineæ._

    Seeds, under glass in the north. Also increased by dividing
    the tufts.

  =Gynura.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by cuttings and seeds.

  =Gypsophila.= _Caryophylleæ._

    Propagated by seeds, division or cuttings.


  =Habranthus.= See Zephyranthes.

  =Habrothamnus.= See Cestrum.

  =Hackberry.= See Celtis.

  =Hæmanthus= (Blood Flower). _Amaryllideæ._

    Bulbels, which should be removed and potted when the
    plants are commencing new growth, and be kept in a close
    pit or house till established. Seeds are rarely used.

  =Hæmodorum= (Australian Blood-root). _Hæmodoraceæ._

    Increased by dividing the roots in spring.

  =Hakea=, Conchium. _Proteaceæ._

    Well-ripened cuttings, placed in sandy peat under glass, in
    a cool house. Seeds, when obtainable, can be used.

  =Halesia=, Pterostyrax (Silver-bell or Snowdrop Tree). _Styracaceæ._

    Seeds, which rarely germinate till the second year. They
    should be kept constantly moist. Propagation is also effected
    by layers, or by cuttings of the roots in spring and autumn.
    Layers are commonly employed in this country.

  =Halimodendron= (Salt-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Freely increased by seeds, layers or cuttings. May also
    be grafted on common laburnum.

  =Hamamelis= (Witch-hazel). _Hamamelideæ._

    All grow from seeds or layers, and the Japan species succeed
    if grafted on American species in the greenhouse. _H.
    Virginica_ may be readily propagated by layers.

  =Hamelia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings which are nearly ripe will root during
    the early part of summer under glass, with heat.

  =Hamiltonia=, Spermadictyon. _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Half-ripened cuttings, placed in sand under glass.

  =Hardenbergia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds may be used; also increased by divisions. Cuttings,
    made of the firm young side shoots in spring, will grow if inserted
    under a bell-glass, and placed in a warm frame or pit,
    without bottom heat.

  =Hardwickia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by ripened cuttings in sand, in a strong heat.

  =Harebell.= See Campanula.

  =Hatchet Cactus.= See Pelecyphora.

  =Haw=, Hawthorn. See Cratægus.

  =Hazel.= See Corylus.

  =Heartsease.= See Viola.

  =Heath.= See Erica.

  =Heather.= See Calluna.

  =Hedera= (Ivy). _Araliaceæ._

    Seeds. Layers. The rooted portions of the vine may be
    severed and treated as independent plants. Cuttings may be
    made in autumn from any firm shoots, and inserted in pots
    or in the open ground. If they are placed in heat and kept
    shaded until roots are formed, good plants are obtained much
    sooner than when placed in a cold-frame or in the open air.
    Named varieties are grafted on the stock of any common
    strong climbing form.

  =Hedychium= (Indian Garland Flower). _Scitamineæ._

    Seeds, rarely. Increased by dividing the rhizomes in
    spring, when the plants are repotted.

  =Hedysarum.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation is effected by means of seeds and division.

  =Helenium.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds or divisions.

  =Helianthemum=, including Fumana (Rock-Rose, Sun-Rose). _Cistineæ._

    The annuals are raised from seeds. The perennials may
    also be raised from seeds, but it is better to trust to layers
    and to cuttings, which will root freely in a sandy soil, if kept
    shaded until established.

  =Helianthus=, including Harpalium (Sunflower). _Compositæ._

    By seeds, which may be sown in pots, and the seedlings
    transferred, or in the open ground in spring. Also divisions.

  =Helichrysum=, Elichrysum (Everlastings). _Compositæ._

    The annual species and the varieties of H. bracteatum may
    be raised from seed, sown in a light heat in early spring,
    and afterwards transplanted; or sown in the open ground a
    little later. The perennial species are increased by cuttings
    in spring, in a close frame without heat.

  =Heliconia.= _Scitamineæ._

    May be increased by seeds, but the best method is by division
    of the root stock in spring when growth commences.
    Separate pieces may be placed in pots, and grown in a moist
    stove temperature, repotting when necessary; or they may
    be planted out in the stove, if desired.

  =Heliotropium= (Heliotrope). _Boragineæ._

    Seeds. The common practice is to use cuttings. These
    can be taken at almost any season, if good growing shoots
    are to be had. They start readily in sand or soil on a cutting
    bench, or under a frame. Plants for bedding are struck
    in late winter from stocks which are in a vigorous condition.

  =Helipterum=, including Astelma, Rhodanthe. _Compositæ._

    Seeds may be sown in early spring, under cover.

  =Helleborus= (Black Hellebore, Christmas Rose). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown as soon as ripe. Strong and healthy
    root divisions are also employed.

  =Helonias.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds, and slowly by root divisions.

  =Hemerocallis= (Day Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by divisions. _H. Middendorfii_ and some others
    by seed.

  =Hemlock Spruce.= See Tsuga.

  =Hemp.= See Cannabis.

  =Hepatica.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Can be propagated by division; also by seeds.

  =Heracleum= (Cow Parsley, Cow Parsnip). _Umbelliferæ._

    Readily increased by seeds or divisions.

  =Herbertia.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by means of seeds or bulbels.

  =Herb-Robert.= See Geranium.

  =Hesperis= (Dame's Violet, Rocket). _Cruciferæ._

    The single sorts are increased by seeds; the double forms
    by carefully dividing the roots, or by cuttings.

  =Heterocentron.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings.

  =Heuchera= (Alum Root). _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds. Readily increased by dividing the crowns during
    spring.

  =Hevea=, Micrandra, Siphonia. _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Cuttings should be made of half-ripened wood, and inserted
    in sand under glass.

  =Hibbertia=, including Cyclandra, Pleurandra. _Dilleniaceæ._

    Cuttings, in sandy peat under glass.

  =Hibiscus.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds sometimes. Also by divisions and layers. Cuttings
    of green-wood are commonly used, made in summer for hardy
    species or in early spring for tender ones. Cuttings of ripened
    wood may be taken in fall, and stored until spring in a
    rather dry place. The variegated sorts do better if grafted
    upon strong stocks.

  =Hicoria=, Carya (Hickory, Pecan, etc.). _Juglandeæ._

    Increased chiefly by seeds, which should be stratified; also
    by root-sprouts. Seeds are sometimes planted at intervals
    in the field where the trees are to stand; but this practice is
    not to be recommended. The hickory can be grafted. Best
    results are obtained by veneer or splice-grafting in winter,
    on potted stocks. Cleft-grafting can be employed out-doors.
    Saddle-grafting upon young twigs is sometimes used. See
    also Pecan.

  =Hippeastrum= (Equestrian Star). _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds may be sown as soon as ripe in well-drained pots or
    pans of sandy loam, slightly covered, and placed in a temperature
    of about 65°. For increasing by divisions--which
    is the usual way--the old bulbs should be taken from the
    pots and carefully separated, with the least possible injury
    to the roots. This should be done when the plants are at
    rest, and the offsets should be placed singly in pots. Keep
    the bulb about two-thirds above the level of the soil, dispose
    the roots evenly, and plunge in bottom heat, in a position
    exposed to the light.

  =Hippomane=, Mancinella. _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, placed in sand under glass.

  =Hippophaë= (Sallow Thorn, Sea Buckthorn). _Elæagnaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, suckers, layers, and cuttings of
    the roots.

  =Hoffmannia=, Higginsia. _Rubiaceæ._

    Insert cuttings in sandy soil under cover, in bottom heat.

  =Hog Plum.= See Spondias.

  =Holbœllia.= _Berberideæ._

    In spring, cuttings may be made of half-ripened shoots.

  =Holly.= See Ilex.

  =Hollyhock= (Althæa). _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds should be sown as soon as ripe--in summer--in pots
    or pans, and placed in a slight bottom heat or in the open
    air. In either case, place the seedlings in 3-inch pots, and
    winter in a cold-frame. Dividing the roots, after flowering is
    over, by separating the crown, so as to preserve one or more
    buds and as many roots as possible to each piece. Cuttings
    of young shoots three inches long, taken off close to the old
    root at nearly the same time, should be placed singly in small
    pots of light, sandy soil and kept close, and shaded in a cold-frame
    until rooted. If cuttings are made during winter, a
    gentle bottom heat must be given. Also grafted (see page
    88). See also Althæa.

  =Honesty.= See Lunaria.

  =Honey-Locust.= See Gleditschia.

  =Honeysuckle.= See Lonicera.

  =Hop.= See Humulus.

  =Hop Hornbeam.= See Ostrya.

  =Horehound= (_Marrubium vulgare_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, in early spring. Division.

  =Horkelia.= See Potentilla.

  =Hornbeam.= See Carpinus.

  =Horse Chestnut.= See Æsculus.

  =Horse Mint.= See Monarda.

  =Horse-Radish= (_Nasturtium Armoracia_). _Cruciferæ._

    Root-cuttings ("sets"). These are made from the small
    side roots when the horse-radish is dug. They may be anywhere
    from one-fourth to one inch in diameter, and three to
    six inches long, one end being cut slanting, to mark it.
    These are planted obliquely, two to four inches deep, in
    spring. They may be buried during winter. (Fig. 48). The
    old crowns may be planted, but they make poorer roots.

  =Hottonia.= _Primulaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds and divisions in spring.

  =House-Leek.= See Sempervivum.

  =Houstonia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. May also be increased by carefully made divisions
    in autumn or spring.

  =Hovea=, Poiretia. _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation is best effected by seeds, sown in well-drained
    pots of sandy peat soil in spring, and placed in a gentle bottom
    heat. Cuttings are difficult to strike.

  =Hovenia.= _Rhamneæ._

    Increased by seeds. Root-cuttings are also used. Ripened
    cuttings should be placed in sand, under a hand-glass.

  =Hoya= (Honey Plant, Wax Flower). _Asclepiadeæ._

    For layering, good-sized shoots should have a few of their
    leaves removed, and should then be put in pots of soil until
    rooted. The plants may afterwards be grown on, and repotted
    according to their strength. Cuttings may be taken
    in spring or later in the year, from shoots of the preceding
    summer's growth, and placed in a compost of peat and sand,
    and plunged in bottom heat in a frame. A slight shade and
    careful watering will be necessary. _H. bella_ does best when
    grafted on a stronger growing sort.

  =Huckleberry.= See Vaccinium.

  =Humea=, Agathomeris, Calomeria. _Compositæ._

    Sow seeds in light, finely sifted soil, and place in a frame
    in early summer.

  =Humulus= (Hop). _Urticaceæ._

    It may be propagated by seeds, or by divisions in spring.
    Ordinarily, however, the species is increased by hard-wood
    cuttings of two-bud lengths from the best old shoots, and
    made in spring. Leave the top bud just above the ground.

  =Hyacinthus= (Hyacinth). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds are employed for the production of new varieties.
    These are sown the same season they mature, in light, sandy
    soil, and are covered not more than a half-inch deep. In
    four or five years, or sometimes even longer, the bulbs will
    be large enough to flower. Varieties are perpetuated by
    means of the bulbels which form freely upon some varieties.
    These are treated in much the same manner as mature bulbs,
    or they may be handled in pans or flats. They make flower
    bulbs in two or three years. To increase the numbers of
    these bulbels, the bulbs are variously cut by the Dutch growers.
    These practices are described and illustrated on pages
    27 and 28, Figs. 12-14. Hyacinths can be propagated by
    leaf cuttings. Strong leaves should be taken in early spring
    and cut into two or three portions, each portion being inserted
    about an inch in good sandy loam, and given a temperature
    of about 75°. In eight or ten weeks a bulblet will form
    at the base of the cutting (see page 52). The lower leaves
    give better results than the upper ones. These bulblets are
    then treated in the same manner as bulbels.

  =Hydrangea=, Hortensia. _Saxifrageæ._

    The hardy species are usually propagated by green cuttings
    in summer, under glass (see Fig. 57). The tender species
    are increased by cuttings taken at any time from vigorous
    young wood, usually in late winter. Layers are occasionally
    employed, and suckers can be separated from some species.
    Sometimes the hardy species are forced for purposes of propagation
    by cuttage. _H. quercifolia_ is propagated by little
    suckers or "root pips." _H. paniculata, grandiflora_ can easily
    be propagated from the young wood, taken in June and
    planted under glass.

  =Hymenocallis.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Treated the same as Pancratium, which see.

  =Hypericum=, including Androsæmum. _Hypericineæ._

    Easily increased by seeds, cuttings, or by strong pieces of
    the roots of creeping-rooted species. Hard-wooded cuttings
    taken in fall, are commonly used.

  =Hypoxis.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds and offsets.

  =Hyssop= (_Hyssopus officinalis_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds. Division.


  =Iberis= (Candytuft). _Cruciferæ._

    The annuals and biennials are increased by seeds sown in
    light sandy soil, in spring or autumn. The sub-shrubby
    sorts are also increased by seeds sown in spring, but more
    often by divisions or by cuttings.

  =Idesia.= _Bixineæ._

    Seeds may be sown in spring in gentle heat. Half-ripened
    cuttings may be made in spring or autumn, and
    should be inserted in sandy loam, and placed under a bell-glass,
    in gentle heat. Also by root-cuttings.

  =Ilex=, including Prinos (Holly). _Ilicineæ._

    Seeds, which should be stratified. They are often cleaned
    of the pulpy coat by maceration. The seeds rarely germinate
    until the second year. Varieties are perpetuated by
    graftage. The veneer-graft, upon potted plants, is usually
    employed, but other methods may be successful. Budding
    is sometimes performed.

  =Illicium= (Aniseed-tree). _Magnoliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of young ripened shoots may be made
    during summer and should be placed in sandy soil, under a
    glass.

  =Imantophylium.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds. Usually increased by division or by means of
    bulbels.

  =Impatiens=, Balsamina (Balsam). _Geraniaceæ._

    The common annuals may be raised from seeds, in spring,
    in any ordinary light soil. The stove and greenhouse species
    may be increased by seeds, or from cuttings, which root
    freely in a close frame. _I. Sultani_ does best from seeds.

  =Indian Fig.= See Opuntia.

  =Indian Shot.= See Canna.

  =Indigofera= (Indigo). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds. Cuttings of young shoots may be
    inserted in sandy or peaty soil under glass, in slight heat.

  =Inga.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds. Cuttings root with difficulty.

  =Inula=, Elecampane. _Compositæ._

    Readily increased by seeds or by divisions.

  =Ionidium=, Solea. _Violarieæ._

    The herbaceous species are increased by seeds and by
    divisions. The shrubby sorts are increased by cuttings
    which will root in sand, in a frame.

  =Ipomœa=, including Quamoclit (Moon-flower, Morning Glory).
    _Convolvulaceæ._

    All the annual species are grown from seeds. The perennials
    are also increased by seedage, but they may be raised
    from cuttings struck in a forcing-house or a frame. The
    moon-flowers often do better in the north from cuttings than
    from seeds. _I. Horsfalliæ_ is largely propagated by layers,
    and other species may be treated in the same way. Division
    is sometimes employed. _I. pandurata_ can be propagated by
    root-cuttings. Also grafted (see page 88).

  =Ipomopsis.= See Gilia.

  =Iresine=, Achyranthes. _Amarantaceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Increased readily by cuttings. For summer
    bedding in the north, cuttings should be started in
    February or March. For use as window plants, they should
    be taken in late summer.

  =Iriartea=, Deckeria. _Palmæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds.

  =Iris=, including Xiphion. _Irideæ._

    Seeds grow readily and give good results, and they are
    usually produced freely, especially in the bulbous species.
    Sow as soon as ripe in light soil in some protected place.
    The bulbous species produce bulbels, which may be used for
    multiplication. The rhizomatous species are propagated by
    dividing the rhizome into short rooted pieces. Or when the
    rhizomes lie on the surface of the ground and do not root
    readily, they may be layered.

  =Isonandra= (Gutta-Percha Tree). _Sapotaceæ._

    Insert cuttings in sandy soil, under glass, in heat.

  =Isoplexis=, Callianassa. _Scrophularineæ._

    Cuttings of half-ripened shoots should be made in spring
    under glass.

  =Isopyram.= _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by divisions, in autumn or spring.

  =Itea.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by suckers, in spring; and in
    autumn by layers.

  =Ivy.= See Hedera and Ampelopsis.

  =Ixia=, including Morphixia. _Irideæ._

    Seeds may be sown in pans of sandy soil in autumn, and
    placed in a cool frame. Propagation by bulbels is a much
    quicker, as it is the usual method.

  =Ixiolirion=, Kolpakowskia. _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by seeds; and by bulbels.

  =Ixora.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Usually increased by short-jointed green cuttings
    placed in a close frame with a strong bottom heat.


  =Jaborosa.= _Solanaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring, and by divisions, also
    by cuttings of young shoots, placed under a frame.

  =Jacaranda.= _Bignoniaceæ._

    Cuttings of half-ripened shoots may be made in early summer
    and placed in sand over sandy peat, in heat, and kept
    shaded. Also seeds.

  =Jacobæan Lily.= See Amaryllis.

  =Jacobinia.= See Justicia.

  =Jacquinia.= _Myrsineæ._

    Cuttings of ripened shoots, usually made in summer,
    placed in sand, in a moist bottom heat.

  =Jalapa.= See Mirabilis.

  =Jambosa.= See Myrtus.

  =Jasione= (Sheep's Scabious). _Campanulaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring or fall, usually in the open. The
    perennials may be divided.

  =Jasminum= (Jasmine, Jessamine). _Oleaceæ._

    Sometimes by seeds, but usually by cuttings of the nearly
    ripened wood, under glass. Cuttings of ripe wood are also
    employed, and layers are often used.

  =Jatropha.= _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Cuttings made of firm young shoots will strike in sandy
    soil in a strong bottom heat. The cuttings, if very fleshy,
    may be dried a few days before setting them.

  =Jeffersonia.= _Berberideæ._

    Seeds should be sown as soon as ripe, or divisions may be
    made.

  =Jerusalem Artichoke= (Girasole). See Artichoke.

  =Jessamine, Yellow.= See Gelsemium.

  =Jonquil.= See Narcissus.

  =Jubæa= (Coquito Palm of Chili). _Palmæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds.

  =Judas-tree.= See Cercis.

  =Juglans= (Walnut and Butternut). _Juglandeæ._

    All the species are readily propagated by means of stratified
    nuts. Do not allow the nuts to become dry. Artificial
    cracking should not be done. In stiff soils the seedlings
    are apt to produce a long tap-root which renders transplanting
    difficult after the first year or two. The tap-root may be
    cut by a long knife while the tree is growing, or the young
    seedling may be transplanted. Particular varieties are perpetuated
    by grafting or budding with any of the common
    methods. In the north, they are sometimes worked indoors
    in pots. Common shield-budding works well, if the sap is
    flowing freely in the stock. Flute-budding is often employed.
    The improved native sorts are root-grafted in winter.
    Old trees can be top-grafted like apple-trees (see p. 90).

    The "English" walnut (_J. regia_) is mostly grown direct
    from seed in this country, and the different varieties usually
    come true. In California, the native walnut (_J. Californica_)
    is often used as a stock for this species, and flute-budding on
    branches a half-inch or more in diameter is often practiced.
    "Twig-budding," or the insertion of a short branchlet or bit
    of branch which is severed from the parent branch in the
    same manner as a shield bud, is sometimes employed.

  =Jujube= (_Zizyphus Jujube_). _Rhamneæ._

    Seeds and cuttings.

  =Juncus= (Rush, Bulrush). _Junceæ._

    Seeds. The perennials may be increased by division.

  =Juneberry= (_Amelanchier Canadensis_, var. _oblongifolia_). _Rosaceæ._

    Increased by using the sprouts which form freely about
    the old plants; also by seeds.

  =Juniperus= (Juniper, Red Cedar). _Coniferæ._

    Increased readily by seeds, which, however, often lie
    dormant until the second year. They germinate more
    readily if the pulp is removed by maceration or by soaking
    with ashes for a few days. Green cuttings, in sand under
    glass, root easily; or mature cuttings may be taken in fall
    and placed in a cold-frame, in which they will need little protection
    during winter. Some varieties require a long time to
    root. Most of the named varieties may be grafted on imported
    Irish stocks, which are much used in some parts of the
    country. They may be veneer-grafted and handled in a
    cool house.

  =Jurinea.= _Compositæ._

    Increased in spring by seeds or by divisions.

  =Jussiæa.= _Onagrarieæ._

    Seeds and divisions are used for propagating.

  =Justicia=, including Jacobinia and Sericographis. _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds occasionally. The species strike readily from short
    green cuttings on a cutting bench or under a frame.

  =Kadsura=, Sarcocarpon. _Magnoliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, made of nearly ripened shoots, which
    should be placed in sand under glass.

  =Kaki.= See Persimmon.

  =Kalanchoe.= _Crassulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, but cuttings, when obtainable, are
    better.

  =Kale= (_Brassica oleracea_, vars.). _Cruciferæ._

    By seeds, sown in the open in spring in the north, or in
    the fall in the south.

  =Kalmia= (Mountain Laurel, Calico-bush). _Ericaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, which should be sown in shallow
    pans of sandy peat, and kept in a cold-frame until the
    seedlings are large enough to transfer to the open air after
    being hardened off. By cuttings of young shoots in sandy
    peat, placed in a shady situation under a hand-glass. Also
    by layers. Usually obtained from the woods.

  =Kennedya.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds may be sown in spring or summer, or cuttings of
    rather firm side shoots may be made at the same time, and
    placed in peaty soil, in a close, warm frame.

  =Kentia.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds, placed in light, sandy soil, with heat.

  =Kentucky Coffee-tree.= See Gymnocladus.

  =Kerria.= _Rosaceæ._

    Propagated by divisions, layers, and by cuttings of young
    shoots, inserted under a hand-light, or by ripened cuttings.
    In this country, oftener increased by ripe wood in fall.

  =Kitaibelia.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds. May be readily propagated by divisions.

  =Kleinhovia.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Seeds. Make cuttings of the young ripened shoots, and
    place in sand, in heat, under glass.

  =Klugia.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated usually by cuttings.

  =Knightia=, Rymandra. _Proteaceæ._

    Make cuttings of ripened shoots with upper leaves on, and
    place in sandy soil under glass, in a very gentle bottom heat.

  =Kniphofia=, Tritoma. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by divisions of the crown in early
    spring.

  =Knowltonia=, Anamenia. _Ranunculaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and divisions.

  =Kœllikeria.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds, carefully sown. May be propagated by dividing
    the tubers.

  =Kœlreuteria.= _Sapindaceæ._

    Propagated in spring by seed, by layers in autumn, and by
    cuttings of the young shoots in spring; also by root-cuttings.

  =Kœniga.= _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, in spring.

  =Krameria.= _Polygaleæ._

    Cuttings, set in sand under glass, in spring.

  =Kreysigia=, Tripladenia. _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated generally by divisions in spring.

  =Kydia.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds. May be increased by cuttings of firm shoots, which
    root in sand under glass.


  =Laburnum.= _Leguminosæ._

    The species may be increased by seeds. Layers and suckers
    are often used. The varieties by grafting or budding on
    the common sorts.

  =Lachenalia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Bulbels.

  =Lachnæa.= _Thymelæaceæ._

    Cuttings of short young shoots may be made in spring, and
    should be placed in sand, under glass.

  =Lælia.= _Orchideæ._

    Increased by pseudo-bulbs, as in cattleya. See also under
    Orchids.

  =Lagerstrœmia= (Crape Myrtle). _Lythrarieæ._

    Layers. Cuttings of firm, small side shoots may be made
    in spring, and placed in bottom heat.

  =Lagetta= (Lace Bark). _Thymelæaceæ._

    Usually increased by cuttings of firm shoots, placed in
    sand under glass, in bottom heat.

  =Lagunaria.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of half-ripened shoots, placed under glass,
    in a gentle heat.

  =Lambertia.= _Proteaceæ_.

    Increased by seeds, sown in slight heat. By cuttings,
    made of young and rather firm shoots.

  =Lantana.= _Verbenaceæ._

    Seeds, which give new varieties. Cuttings, in fall or
    spring, from good growing wood, in sand in a warm house
    or frame.

  =Lapageria=, Capia, Phænocodon. _Liliaceæ._

    Sow seeds when ripe in a sandy peat soil, and keep in a
    moderate heat. Increased by layers of firm, strong shoots.

  =Laportea.= _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by cuttings placed in sand, in heat.

  =Lardizibala.= _Berberideæ._

    The cuttings, made of half-ripened shoots, should be inserted
    in sandy soil under glass.

  =Larix= (Larch, Tamarack). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds should be kept dry over winter and planted early in
    spring. Shade the young plants. Varieties, as the weeping
    sorts, are worked upon common stocks. The grafting may
    be done by the whip method, out-doors early in spring. Rare
    sorts are sometimes veneer-grafted under glass.

  =Larkspur.= See Delphinium.

  =Lasiandra.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the growing wood under glass.

  =Lasiopetalum.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Seeds. Make cuttings in spring of the half-ripened wood,
    and insert in sand, under glass.

  =Latania.= See Livistona.

  =Lathyrus= (Sweet Pea, Vetchling). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown very early in the open. The perennials also
    by seeds, sometimes by division.

  =Lattice-leaf.= See Ouvirandra.

  =Latua.= _Solanaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings, placed in sand under glass.

  =Laurel, Mountain.= See Kalmia.

  =Laurus= (Laurel). _Laurineæ._

    Increased by seeds, layers, and by cuttings, placed under
    a hand-glass in sandy soil. Also propagated by root-cuttings.

  =Laurustinus.= See Viburnum.

  =Lavandula= (Lavender). _Labiatæ._

    Divisions. When the flowers are fully expanded, cuttings
    may be made. These should be inserted in sandy soil, under
    a frame.

  =Lawsonia=, Alcanna. _Lythrarieæ._

    Increased by cuttings of ripened shoots, placed in sand
    under a glass, in heat.

  =Laxmannia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagation is usually effected by divisions or
    bulbels.

  =Layia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in a hot-bed, or in the open border
    in the south.

  =Leaf-Beet= or =Chard=. See Beet.

  =Ledum= (Labrador Tea). _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and divisions, but principally by layers,
    in sandy peat soil.

  =Leek= (_Allium Porrum_). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds, sown very early in the spring, either out-doors or
    in a cold-frame.

  =Leianthus.= _Gentianeæ._

    Seeds, under cover; or cuttings of young shoots may be
    made, and inserted in sandy soil under glass.

  =Leiophyllum= (Sand Myrtle). _Ericaceæ._

    May be freely increased by seeds, sown in pans and placed
    in a frame. By layers in autumn.

  =Lemon= (_Citrus Limonum_). _Rutaceæ._

    The named sorts are budded upon either orange or lemon
    stocks. Orange stocks are probably most generally preferred,
    as they are adapted to a great variety of soils, and
    vigorous trees nearly always result. The budding is performed
    in the same manner as upon the orange, which see.
    Lemons are often grown from cuttings of the mature wood,
    which are set in the open ground as soon as the spring becomes
    warm, or in a frame. Stocks for budding upon are
    sometimes grown from cuttings in this way.

  =Lentil= (_Ervum_, various species). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown in early spring.

  =Leonotis= (Lion's Ear, Lion's Tail). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds. Increased by cuttings, which root freely in a gentle
    bottom heat, in early spring.

  =Leontice.= _Berberideæ._

    May be increased by seeds or by suckers.

  =Leontopodium= (Edelweiss, Lion's Foot). _Compositæ._

    May annually be raised from seeds, or the old plants may
    be divided in spring. The seeds must be kept in a dry place
    throughout the winter.

  =Lepachys.= See Rudbeckia.

  =Leptosyne.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Leschenaultia.= _Goodenovieæ._

    In spring or summer cuttings may be taken from the points
    of shoots that are rather firm, and placed in sandy peat, in a
    shaded frame.

  =Lessertia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation by seeds, or by divisions in spring.

  =Lettuce= (_Lactuca sativa_). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, which may be sown under glass or in the open. In
    the middle and southern states, the seeds may be sown in the
    fall, and the plants protected during cold by a mulch; or the
    plants may grow during winter in the warmer parts.

  =Leucadendron= (Silver Tree). _Proteaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Leucoium= (Snowflake). _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds, for producing new sorts. Propagation is commonly
    effected by bulbels, which should be secured as soon as possible
    after the foliage ripens.

  =Leucothoë.= _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be covered very lightly.
    By divisions of established plants in autumn or winter. Also
    by layers.

  =Lewisia.= _Portulacaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, or by divisions in spring.

  =Leycesteria.= _Caprifoliaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, sown in spring. By cuttings
    of the short young shoots, made in spring; by older ones
    made in autumn.

  =Leyssera.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by firm cuttings, placed in sandy
    soil during summer.

  =Liatris= (Blazing Star, Button Snake-Root). _Compositæ._

    Seeds are usually sown early in autumn. Divisions may
    be made in spring.

  =Libonia.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds are rarely employed. Usually increased by short
    green cuttings in a frame.

  =Licuala=, Pericycla. _Palmæ._

    Seeds may be sown in spring in a sandy soil, and placed in
    a strong, moist bottom heat.

  =Lietzia.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in early spring, in heat; by cuttings
    inserted in sand under a glass, in bottom heat; or by
    tubers, which must be kept dry in winter and potted in early
    spring.

  =Lightfootia.= _Campanulaceæ._

    The annuals, by seeds sown in a warm frame in spring.
    Perennials also by cuttings made of young shoots placed
    in sand containing a little peat, under glass.

  =Ligularia.= _Compositæ._

    Increased by seeds, or by divisions in spring and autumn.

  =Ligustrum= (Privet, Prim). _Oleaceæ._

    Stratified seeds. Division. The named varieties are
    grown from cuttings, either of green or ripe wood.

  =Lilac.= See Syringa.

  =Lilium= (Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds--giving new varieties in the variable species--should
    be sown as soon as ripe in well-drained pans of sandy peat,
    slightly covered with similar soil and a layer of moss, and
    placed in a cool frame. Usually increased by bulbels, which
    should be planted a few inches apart in prepared beds.
    Sometimes small bulblets form in the axils of the leaves, and
    these are used in the same manner as bulbels. Bulb-scales
    are often employed for the multiplication of scarce kinds.
    Those which produce large and loose bulbs, as _L. candidum_,
    may be increased by simple division. These operations are
    described on pp. 25 to 29.

  =Lily of the Valley.= See Convallaria.

  =Lime= (_Citrus Limetta_). _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds, which usually reproduce the variety. Some varieties
    are budded upon strong seedlings.

  =Lime-tree.= See Tilia.

  =Limnanthes.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Freely increased by seeds in any ordinary garden soil in
    spring or autumn.

  =Limnocharis.= _Alismaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, by divisions, and by runners.

  =Linaria= (Toadflax). _Scrophularineæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in light soil, in early spring. Or
    by divisions made in spring or autumn. The greenhouse
    species are ordinarily grown from seeds, which should be carefully
    sown in finely pulverized soil. Cuttings may also
    be used.

  =Linden.= See Tilia.

  =Lindleya.= _Rosaceæ._

    Increased by ripened cuttings under glass in bottom heat;
    or by grafting on the hawthorn.

  =Linnæa.= _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Naturally increased by layers or runners. Seeds are
    rarely employed.

  =Linum= (Flax). _Lineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, the hardy species sown out-doors
    and the tender ones under glass. Cuttings may be taken
    from firm shoots and inserted in a sandy position under
    glass. The ordinary flax is sown directly in the field.

  =Lippia=, including Aloysia, Zapania. _Verbenaceæ._

    Seeds. Usually by cuttings of young shoots, which will
    root freely in sandy soil in a close, warm frame. If it is not
    possible to secure the necessary heat, cuttings of the hard
    wood can be used in autumn, under glass.

  =Liquidambar= (Sweet Gum). _Hammelideæ._

    Seeds, which should be stratified or sown as soon as ripe.
    Many of the seeds may lie dormant until the second year.

  =Liquorice.= See Glycyrrhiza.

  =Liriodendron= (Tulip-tree, White-wood). _Magnoliaceæ._

    Increased by stratified seeds. Named varieties are grafted
    on seedlings. The seeds of the tulip-tree are apt to be hollow,
    especially those grown along the eastern limits of the
    distribution of the species.

  =Lisianthus.= _Gentianeæ._

    The annuals may be increased by seeds, those of a shrubby
    habit by cuttings.

  =Litchi.= See Nephelium.

  =Lithospermum=, including Batschia (Gromwell). _Boragineæ._

    May be propagated by seeds, by divisions, or by cuttings.

  =Livistona=, Latania, Saribus (Fan Palm). _Palmæ._

    Seeds, sown in a sandy soil and placed in a gentle bottom
    heat.

  =Lloydia.= _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Increased by bulbels, or by the creeping
    shoots leaving a bulb at the extremity.

  =Loasa=, including Illairea. _Loaseæ._

    All are easily increased by seeds sown in a light, sandy
    soil, usually under cover. Cuttings are rarely used.

  =Lobelia.= _Campanulaceæ._

    Ordinarily increased by seeds, which are more certain if
    handled in pans or flats under glass. Cuttings from vigorous
    shoots may be employed, and strong plants of some
    species may be divided. The cardinal flower (_L. cardinalis_)
    is grown from seeds carefully sown in fine soil, usually
    under cover.

  =Locust-tree.= See Robinia.

  =Loddigesia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Increased in spring by cuttings placed under glass, in
    sandy soil.

  =Lœselia=, Hoitzia. _Polemoniaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of half-ripened shoots in sand under glass.

  =Logania=, Euosma. _Loganiaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of firm side shoots inserted in
    sandy soil, under glass.

  =Loiseleurea.= _Ericaceæ._

    Propagation by layers; very rarely by seeds, which are
    slow and uncertain.

  =Lomatia=, Tricondylus. _Proteaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of well-ripened shoots placed in a
    gentle heat under glass.

  =Lonchocarpus.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Propagated by growing cuttings placed in sand
    under glass, in mild heat.

  =Lonicera=, including Caprifolium and Xylosteum (Honeysuckle).
    _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Seeds, for new varieties. Sow as soon as ripe, or stratify,
    first removing them from the pulp. The upright species are
    commonly grown from layers and from cuttings of dormant
    wood. The creepers are mostly grown from dormant
    cuttings.

  =Lopezia=, Pisaura. _Onagrarieæ._

    Seeds, under cover in spring. Also increased by cuttings.

  =Lophanthus= (Giant Hyssop). _Labiatæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds and divisions.

  =Lophospermum.= See Maurandya.

  =Loquat.= See Photinia.

  =Lotus.= _Leguminosæ._

    The species may be raised annually from seeds. Increased
    also by cuttings.

  =Lotus of the Nile.= See Nymphæa.

  =Lovage= (_Levisticum officinale_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds sown in the open ground, and division.

  =Lucern.= See Medicago.

  =Luculia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Sow seeds in sandy soil and place in a little heat. Cuttings
    of young shoots may be inserted in spring, under glass,
    in gentle bottom heat for the first two or three weeks. Insert
    immediately after cutting and water freely.

  =Luffa= (Dish-cloth Gourd). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in the open, or in the north better started in
    pots in early spring.

  =Lunaria= (Honesty). _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by divisions.

  =Lupinus= (Lupin). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds of annuals may be sown in the open border during
    early spring. The perennials may be increased the same
    way, or by dividing the stronger growing plants during very
    early spring.

  =Lycaste.= _Orchideæ._

    Division and pseudo-bulbs. (See also under Orchids).

  =Lychnis=, including Agrostemma, Viscaria. _Caryophylleæ._

    Increased readily in spring by seeds, divisions or cuttings.

  =Lycium= (Matrimony Vine, Box Thorn). _Solanaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, suckers, layers; and by cuttings
    made in autumn or spring.

  =Lygodium= (Hartford Fern, Climbing Fern). _Filices._

    By spores and divisions of the root. See Ferns.

  =Lyonia.= _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown very carefully
    in sandy peat soil. Also by layers.

  =Lysimachia= (Loosestrife). _Primulaceæ._

    Propagation is easily effected by seeds; by divisions in
    late autumn or early spring; and by cuttings.

  =Lythrum= (Loosestrife). _Lythrarieæ._

    Seeds and divisions are the usual methods. Cuttings are
    employed for some species.


  =Maclura= (Osage Orange). _Urticaceæ._

    Sow seed in the spring. Soak in warm water a few days
    before sowing.

  =Madia.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds.

  =Magnolia.= _Magnoliaceæ._

    Seeds are commonly used. The coverings should be
    macerated from the very pulpy species. The cucumber-trees
    and some others are sown directly in autumn. The
    seeds of any species should not be allowed to become thoroughly
    dry. Magnolias strike well from green cuttings, cut
    to a heel and handled under glass. Layers are often used.
    Named varieties are veneer- or side-grafted upon strong
    stocks. The cucumber tree (_M. acuminata_) is used as a
    stock for all species. The umbrella tree (_M. umbrella_) is
    also a good stock.

  =Mahernia.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Propagated during summer by cuttings of young shoots,
    one or two inches long, inserted in sandy soil, under glass.

  =Mahonia.= See Berberis.

  =Maidenhair-tree.= See Ginkgo.

  =Maize=(_Zea Mays_). _Gramineæ._

    Seeds (properly fruits) planted upon the approach of warm
    weather.

  =Malcolmia.= _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Mallow.= See Malva.

  =Malope.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown either under glass in early spring, or
    in the open border a month or two later.

  =Malpighia.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Cuttings of nearly ripened shoots may be made in summer,
    with leaves or under glass.

  =Malva= (Mallow). _Malvaceæ._

    The annuals by seeds only. The perennials may be increased
    by seeds, divisions or cuttings.

  =Malvaviscus=, Achania. _Malvaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings of side shoots, placed
    under glass, in heat.

  =Mammea= (Mammee Apple, St. Domingo Apricot). _Guttiferæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of half-ripened shoots should be taken
    with the leaves on and placed in a frame.

  =Mammillaria.= See Cactus.

  =Mandevilla.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, layers, or cuttings of half-ripened
    wood.

  =Mandiocca.= See Manihot.

  =Mandragora= (Mandrake). _Solanaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by divisions.

  =Mandrake.= See Mandragora and Podophyllum.

  =Manettia.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds are sometimes employed. Usually increased by cuttings
    of young shoots. Root-cuttings are sometimes made.

  =Mangifera.= See Mango.

  =Mango= (_Mangifera Indica_). _Anacardiaceæ._

    Stocks are obtained by seeds. The seeds usually have
    more than one embryo, sometimes as many as ten. Each
    embryo will produce a distinct plant. The embryos may be
    separated before planting, but it is preferable to separate the
    young plantlets soon after germination, before they grow together,
    as they are apt to do. The seeds germinate better
    if the hard shell is removed before planting. Seeds retain
    their vitality but a few days, and if to be shipped for sowing
    they should be enclosed in wax. Seedlings begin to bear
    from the third to the sixth years. Varieties are inarched
    upon other stocks.

  =Mangostana=, Mangosteen. See Garcinia.

  =Manicaria=, Pilophora. _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in a strong,
    moist heat.

  =Manihot=, Janipha, Mandiocca. _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by cuttings of young and rather
    firm shoots, placed in sandy peat under glass, in bottom
    heat. For the propagation of _M. Aipe_, see Cassava.

  =Mantisia.= _Scitamineæ._

    Propagated usually by divisions, made just as growth commences.

  =Maple.= See Acer.

  =Maranta.= _Scitamineæ._

    Propagated the same as Calathea, which see.

  =Marguerite= or =Paris Daisy= (_Chrysanthemum frutescens_). _Compositæ._

    Cuttings, as described for Chrysanthemum.

  =Marica.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seeds, and by division of the rhizomes,
    placing each portion in sand, in a high bottom heat.

  =Marigold.= See Tagetes.

  =Mariposa Lily.= See Calochortus.

  =Marsdenia.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    In spring, cuttings may be made and inserted in sand,
    under glass.

  =Marsh-Mallow.= See Althæa.

  =Marsh-Marigold.= See Caltha.

  =Martynia= (Unicorn Plant). _Pedalineæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to grow, or started under
    glass in the north.

  =Masdevallia.= _Orchideæ._

    Division. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Matthiola= (Stock, Gilliflower). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, sown either under cover or in the garden. Grows
    readily from cuttings.

  =Maurandya=, including Lophospermum. _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds, sown in heat. Cuttings of young growth under
    glass.

  =Mauritia=, including Orophoma. _Palmæ._

    Sow seeds in heat.

  =Maxillaria.= _Orchideæ._

    Division of the plants, and also of the pseudo-bulbs. (See
    also under Orchids.)

  =May-Apple.= See Podophyllum.

  =Meadow-Rue.= See Thalictrum.

  =Meadow-Sweet.= See Spiræa.

  =Meconopsis.= _Papaveraceæ._

    Seeds, sown in early spring in a gentle heat. Also propagated
    by division.

  =Medeola= (Indian Cucumber). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. May be increased by dividing the plants in spring.

  =Medicago= (Lucerno, Medick). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions.

  =Medinilla.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Cuttings of young wood in strong, close heat.

  =Medlar= (_Pyrus_ [or _Mespilus_] _Germanica_). _Rosaceæ._

    Stocks are grown from stratified medlar seeds, and the
    plant may be worked upon these, the thorn or quince.

  =Megarrhiza.= _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds, sown in gentle heat in
    spring.

  =Melittis= (Bastard Balm). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds and division.

  =Melaleuca.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Seeds. In spring, cuttings getting firm at the base may
    be made about three inches in length. Place in a compost
    of peat and sandy loam.

  =Melastoma.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Make cuttings during spring, and place in sandy peat under
    glass in heat.

  =Melia= (Bead-tree). _Meliaceæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as ripe. Cuttings of growing wood
    under glass.

  =Melianthus= (Honey Flower). _Sapindaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, by root-sprouts, or by cuttings, which
    root freely under glass.

  =Melichrus.= _Epacrideæ._

    Cuttings of the shoots should be made, about two inches
    long, and inserted in sandy soil.

  =Melicocca= (Ginep, Spanish Lime). _Sapindaceæ._

    Seeds. Place ripened cuttings in sand under glass, in
    heat.

  =Melocactus.= See Cactus.

  =Melon= (_Cucumis Melo_). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to stand. In the north
    they are occasionally started under glass in pots or pieces of
    inverted sods, by amateurs.

  =Menispermum= (Moon-seed). _Menispermaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions or cuttings in spring.

  =Menyanthes= (Buckbean). _Gentianeæ._

    Increased by seeds; by divisions of the roots.

  =Menziesia.= _Ericaceæ._

    May be increased by dividing established tufts, by layers
    or by cuttings.

  =Mertensia=, Lungwort. _Boragineæ._

    Propagation is effected by sowing seeds as soon as ripe, or
    by divisions in autumn.

  =Mesembryanthemum= (Fig Marigold, Ice Plant). _Ficoideæ._

    May be easily propagated by seeds, sown under glass; by
    pieces, pulled or cut off, and laid in the sun on moist sand.

  =Mespilus.= See Medlar.

  =Metrosideros.= _Myrtaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds; also by cuttings of the hardened
    wood in late autumn.

  =Mezereum=, Mezereon. See Daphne.

  =Michælmas Daisy.= See Aster.

  =Michauxia.= _Campanulaceæ._

    The seeds may be sown in the border in spring.

  =Michelia.= _Magnoliaceæ._

    Seeds. Make cuttings of growing wood in summer, and
    place in sand under glass.

  =Mignonette.= See Reseda.

  =Milfoil.= See Achillea.

  =Milkweed.= See Asclepias.

  =Milla.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, bulbels or divisions.

  =Miltonia.= _Orchideæ._

    Dividing the pseudo-bulbs. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Mimosa= (Sensitive Plant). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown in-doors. Cuttings of rather firm shoots, and
    inserted in sandy soil, in heat.

  =Mimulus= (Monkey Flower, Musk Plant). _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be thinly sown and
    lightly covered. Also by divisions and cuttings.

  =Mint.= See Peppermint and Spearmint.

  =Mirabilis=, Jalapa (Marvel of Peru, Four-o'clock). _Nyctagineæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring either under cover or out-doors.

  =Mistletoe.= See Viscum.

  =Mock Orange.= See Philadelphus.

  =Momordica.= _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in heat early in
    spring.

  =Monarda= (Horse Mint). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds. Propagated also by dividing the roots.

  =Monk's Hood.= See Aconitum.

  =Monsonia.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds, sown in-doors in spring;
    by division, or by cuttings placed in sandy soil under a hand-light,
    in spring or autumn.

  =Monstera=, Serangium, Tornelia. _Aroideæ._

    Easily increased by seeds and by cuttings of the stem.

  =Montbretia.= See Tritonia.

  =Montezuma.= _Malvaceæ._

    Make cuttings of rather firm shoots, and insert in sand
    under glass.

  =Moon-seed.= See Menispermum.

  =Moon-flower.= See Ipomœa.

  =Moricandia.= _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seed, sown in the open ground during spring.

  =Moringa=, Anoma. _Moringeæ._

    Make cuttings of half-ripened shoots in spring, and insert
    in sand under glass.

  =Morning-glory.= See Ipomœa.

  =Morus.= See Mulberry.

  =Mountain Ash.= See Pyrus.

  =Mountain Laurel.= See Kalmia.

  =Mourning Bride.= See Scabiosa.

  =Mucuna.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation may be effected by seeds or by cuttings of
    half-ripened wood, under glass.

  =Muehlenbeckia=, Sarcogonum. _Polygonaceæ._

    Seeds. Increased usually by cuttings, taken in early summer
    in a frame.

  =Mulberry= (_Mortis alba_, _M. nigra_ and _M. rubra_). _Urticaceæ._

    New sorts are grown by seeds, which should be handled
    in the same manner as small fruit seeds. Named varieties
    are multiplied by cuttings of the root, or of mature wood,
    and sometimes by layers. The tree may also be budded or
    grafted by ordinary methods.

    The common white mulberry was formerly used as a stock
    for named varieties, but Russian mulberry seedlings are
    now much used. The stocks may be top-worked out-doors,
    or root-grafted in the house. They are commonly crown-worked,
    however, in the house in winter, the stocks being
    grown in pots or boxes for the purpose. They are then kept
    under glass until the weather permits them out-doors. By
    this method fine specimen trees are procured, but they are
    readily handled by cheaper methods. The weeping and
    other ornamental sorts are now worked upon the Russian
    mulberry.

  =Mulberry, Paper.= See Broussonetia.

  =Mullein.= See Verbascum.

  =Musa= (Banana, or Plantain-tree). _Scitamineæ._

    Seeds may be sown in heat during spring. Suckers are
    used for those species which produce them. Many of the
    species do not produce seeds freely, and suckers must be
    relied upon. See Banana.

  =Muscari=, including Botryanthus (Grape Hyacinth). _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by bulbels, which are obtained by
    lifting the old bulbs early in the autumn, about every second
    year.

  =Mushroom= (_Agaricus campestris_).

    Break up the commercial spawn into pieces about as large
    as a hen's egg, and plant it in drills or holes, using from one-half
    pound to a pound of spawn to each square yard of bed.

    The spawn is the mycelium of the fungus held in a mass
    or "brick" of earth and manure. Various methods are employed
    for making the spawn, but the essentials of them all
    are that the body of the brick shall be composed of a porous
    and light material, which can be compressed into a compact
    mass; fresh mycelium must be communicated to this mass,
    and then a mild heat must be applied, until the whole mass
    is permeated by the mycelium. The mass should be kept in
    heat until the whole of it assumes a somewhat cloudy look,
    but not until the threads of the mycelium can be seen. Ordinarily,
    fresh horse manure, cow manure and good loam
    are mixed together in about equal proportions, enough water
    being added to render the material of the consistency of
    mortar. It is then spread upon the floor or in large vats,
    until sufficiently dry to be cut into bricks. When these are
    tolerably well dried, mycelium from a mushroom bed or from
    other bricks is inserted in the side of each brick. A bit of
    spawn about the size of a small walnut is thus inserted, and
    the hole is plugged up. The bricks are now placed in a mild
    covered hot-bed, with a bottom heat of 55° to 65°, and left
    there until the clouded appearance indicates that the mycelium
    has extended throughout the mass. Soil from a good
    mushroom bed is sometimes used to sow new beds, in place
    of commercial spawn. Old clumps of mushrooms may be
    allowed to become dry, and they may then be mixed into a
    bed. The spores will then stock the soil and produce a new
    crop. The full-grown mushroom may be laid upon white
    paper until the spores are discharged, and these spores may
    then be mixed into the earth. Propagation by spores is little
    understood, however. (See page 24.)

  =Mustard= (_Brassica_ or _Sinapis_ species).

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Mutisia.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds. Layers and cuttings of growing wood, those of the
    tender species in bottom heat.

  =Mygindia=, Rhacoma. _Celastrineæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of firm shoots under glass.

  =Myoporum.= _Myoporineæ._

    Seeds, when obtainable. Usually by cuttings of young
    wood in heat.

  =Myosotis= (Forget-me-not). _Boragineæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in spring in-doors or in the garden.
    The perennials may also be increased by divisions, in
    spring, or by cuttings placed under a hand-glass in a shady
    spot, in summer.

  =Myrica= (Bayberry, Sweet Gale, Wax Myrtle, Candleberry). _Myricaceæ._

    Hardy species mostly by seeds, from which the pulp has
    been removed. Sow as soon as ripe, or stratify them. Layers
    and divisions may also be employed. The greenhouse
    species are increased mostly by green cuttings.

  =Myristica= (Nutmeg). _Myristiceæ._

    May be increased by seeds; or by cuttings of ripened
    shoots placed in sand under glass, in bottom heat.

  =Myrobolan.= See Prunus.

  =Myrodia=, Lexarsa. _Sterculiaceæ._

    Cuttings of firm shoots, which should be placed in sand
    under glass, in heat.

  =Myroxylon= (Tolu Balsam-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation is effected during summer by cuttings of growing
    shoots placed in sand in a frame.

  =Myrrhis= (Sweet Cicely or Myrrh). _Umbelliferæ._

    May be increased by divisions or by seeds.

  =Myrsiphyllum.= _Liliaceæ._

    Freely increased by seeds, by divisions, or by cuttings.
    _M. asparagoides_, the "Smilax" or Boston-vine of greenhouses,
    is increased by seeds, which germinate readily.

  =Myrtus=, including Ugni (Myrtle). _Myrtaceæ._

    Seeds, when they can be obtained. Readily propagated
    by cuttings of firm or partially ripened shoots, placed in
    a close frame; those of the stove species require a warmer
    temperature than the half-hardy ones.


  =Nægelia.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Propagation is effected by potting the runners
    in spring or summer in a compost of peat, leaf soil and
    a little loam. Cuttings of young shoots, as mature leaves,
    will also root readily.

  =Napoleona=, Belvisia. _Myrtaceæ._

    Increased by cuttings of half-ripened shoots two to four
    inches long, in mild bottom heat.

  =Narcissus= (Daffodil, Jonquil, Chinese Sacred Lily). _Amaryllideæ._

    New varieties are grown from seeds, which give flowering
    bulbs in three or four years. Ordinarily increased by bulbels,
    which usually flower the second year.

  =Nasturtium.= See Water-Cress and Tropæolum.

  =Nauclea.= _Rubiaceæ._

    May be increased by cuttings of growing shoots, in heat.

  =Nectarine.= See Peach.

  =Negundo= (Box Elder). _Sapindaceæ._

    Propagates with readiness by seeds, which should be sown
    as soon as ripe. Also by cuttings of mature wood, handled
    like grape cuttings.

  =Neillia.= Handled the same as Spiræa, which see.

  =Nelumbo=, Nelumbium (Water Chinquapin, Lotus, Water Bean).
    _Nymphæaceæ._

    Seeds, which may be sown in shallow pans of water in
    the garden, or if sown in ponds they may be incorporated in
    a ball of clay and dropped into the water. The seeds of
    some species are very hard, and germination is facilitated if
    they are very carefully filed or bored (see Fig. 7). Sections
    of the rhizomes may be used instead. They should always
    be covered with water, at least a foot or two deep, if out-doors.

  =Nemastylis=, Nemostylis. _Irideæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds, or by bulbels.

  =Nematanthus.= _Gesneraceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Freely increased by cuttings, inserted in
    sandy soil and kept rather dry.

  =Nemopanthes= (Mountain Holly). _Ilicineæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown as soon as ripe
    or else stratified; also by division of old plants.

  =Nemophila.= _Hydrophyllaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown in late summer or any time during
    early spring.

  =Nepenthes= (Pitcher Plant). _Nepenthaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and cuttings. The seeds must have
    good drainage, uniform conditions and strong heat (80°
    to 85°). Sow upon a soil made of peat and fine sphagnum,
    and keep in a moist and close frame. Cuttings are usually
    struck in moss in a frame having strong bottom heat. A
    good plan is to fill a small pot with moss, invert it, and insert
    the cutting through the hole in the bottom. The pot then
    keeps the moss uniform. The pot is broken when the plant
    is removed. When potting off, use very coarse material.

  =Nepeta=, Glechoma (Catmint, Catnip). _Labiatæ._

    Propagated by sowing seed in spring, or by divisions.

  =Nephelium=, Dimocarpus, Euphoria (Litchi). _Sapindaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, or by cuttings made of half-ripened
    wood.

  =Nephrodium.= See Ferns.

  =Nephrolepis.= See Ferns.

  =Nerine.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds, for new varieties. Commonly increased by means
    of bulbels.

  =Nerium= (Oleander). _Apocynaceæ._

    Layers. Cuttings should be made of matured leading
    shoots, inserted in single pots and placed in a close, warm
    frame; or they may be rooted in bottles of water and afterwards
    potted in soil. See Fig. 52, _a_.

  =Nertera=, Nerteria. _Rubiaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, divisions, or cuttings. Any small
    portion will grow freely, especially if placed in a warm frame.

  =Nesæa=, including Heimia. _Lythrarieæ._

    May be increased by means of seeds, divisions, or green
    cuttings.

  =Nettle-tree.= See Celtis.

  =New Zealand Flax.= See Phormium.

  =Nicandra=, Calydermos. _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in the open border, or under glass in the
    north.

  =Nicotiana= (Tobacco). _Solanaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, started under glass or in a carefully
    prepared seed-bed. The ornamental species sometimes by
    cuttings.

  =Nierembergia.= _Solanaceæ._

    Grown from seeds, under glass. Cuttings of firm shoots
    are also used.

  =Nigella= (Fennel Flower, Love-in-a-Mist). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds sown in early spring in the open.

  =Nightshade.= See Solanum.

  =Nine-bark.= See Spiræa.

  =Nolana.= _Convolvulaceæ._

    Seeds sown in the open border during spring.

  =Norantea=, Ascium, Schwartzia. _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Ripened cuttings can be rooted in sand, in heat.

  =Norfolk Island Pine.= See Araucaria.

  =Norway Spruce.= See Picea.

  =Notelæa=, Rhysospermum. _Oleaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of firm side shoots in spring, usually
    without heat.

  =Nuphar.= Propagated same as Nelumbo and Nymphæa, which see.

  =Nutmeg.= See Myristica.

  =Nuttallia.= _Rosaceæ._

    May be propagated by seeds; by divisions; by means of
    suckers, which spring from the roots.

  =Nyctanthes.= _Oleaceæ._

    Cuttings of half-ripened shoots should be set in spring, in
    bottom heat.

  =Nymphæa=, Castalia (Water Lily, Lotus). _Nymphæaceæ._

    Seeds, which are rolled up in a ball of clay and dropped
    into a pond, or sown in pots which are then submerged in
    shallow water, either in-doors or out. Usually increased by
    portions of the root-stocks, which are sunk in the pond and
    held by stones, or the tender species placed inside, in pans of
    water. Some species produce tubers on the root-stocks,
    which are used for propagation.

  =Nyssa= (Pepperidge, Sour Gum, Tupelo-tree). _Cornaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by layers. The seeds should be
    sown as soon as ripe or else stratified. They usually lie
    dormant the first year.

  =Oak.= See Quercus.

  =Obeliscaria.= See Rudbeckia.

  =Ochna.= _Ochnaceæ._

    During summer, cuttings may be made of growing shoots.

  =Odontoglossum.= _Orchideæ._

    Division. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Œnocarpus.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by suckers.

  =Œnothera=, including Godetia (Evening Primrose). _Onagrameæ._

    Seeds may be sown in spring or summer. Divisions may
    be made. Cuttings of perennials should be placed in a cool
    frame in the early part of the season before flowering begins.

  =Okra=, Gumbo (_Hibiscus esculentus_). _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to stand, or started in
    pots often in the north.

  =Olax.= _Olacineæ._

    Grown from cuttings of firm or mature shoots in heat.

  =Olea.= _Oleaceæ._

    The ornamental species are grown from cuttings of ripened
    shoots, either under frames or in the border, and also by
    seeds. For propagation of _O. Europæa_, see Olive.

  =Oleander.= See Nerium.

  =Olearia=, Eurybia. _Compositæ._

    Seeds. Readily increased by cuttings of growing shoots
    placed in a frame.

  =Oleaster.= See Elæagnus.

  =Olive= (_Olea Europæa_). _Oleaceæ._

    The olive is grown in large quantities from seed, especially
    in Europe. The pulp is removed by maceration or by
    treating with potash. The pits should be cracked or else softened
    by soaking in strong lye, otherwise they will lie dormant
    for one or two years. Cuttings of any kind will grow.
    Limbs, either young or old, an inch or two inches in
    diameter, and from one to two feet long, are often stuck into
    the ground where the trees are to grow, or they are sometimes
    used in the nursery. Green cuttings, with the leaves
    on, are often used, being handled in frames or in boxes of
    sand. Chips from old trunks, if kept warm and moist, will
    grow. The olive is often propagated by truncheons of
    trunks. A trunk two or three inches in diameter is cut into
    foot or two foot lengths, and each length is split through the
    middle. Each half is planted horizontally, bark up, four or five
    inches deep, in warm moist soil. The sprouts which arise may
    be allowed to grow, or they may be made into green cuttings.
    Knaurs (see page 56) are sometimes used. The olive can be
    budded or grafted in a variety of ways. Twig-budding and
    plate or flute-budding give admirable results. Twig-budding
    is the insertion of a small growing twig which is cut from the
    branch in just the manner in which shield-buds are cut.

  =Omphalodes=, Picotia. _Boragineæ._

    Freely increased by means of seeds planted in spring,
    or by divisions.

  =Oncidium.= _Orchideæ._

    Division. In some species detachable buds are produced
    in the inflorescence, and these give young plants. (See also
    under Orchids.)

  =Oncosperma=, Keppleria. _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by suckers.

  =Onion= (_Allium Cepa_). _Liliaceæ._

    Onions are mostly grown from seeds, which must be sown
    as early as possible in spring; or in the south they may be
    sown in the fall. They are also grown from "tops," which
    are bulblets borne in the flower cluster. These are planted
    in the spring, or in the fall in mild climates, and they soon
    grow into large bulbs. "Sets" are also used. These are
    very small onions, and when planted they simply complete
    their growth into large bulbs. Sets are procured by sowing
    seeds very thickly in poor soil. The bulbs soon crowd each
    other, and growth is checked, causing them to ripen prematurely.
    Good sets should not be more than a half inch in
    diameter. Very small onions which are selected from the
    general crop--called "rare-ripes"--are sometimes used as
    sets, but they are usually too large to give good results.
    Some onions--the "multiplier" or "potato onions"--increase
    themselves by division of the bulb. The small bulb, which
    is planted in the spring, splits up into several distinct portions,
    each one of which will multiply itself in the same
    manner when planted the following year.

  =Onobrychis= (Saintfoin). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring where the plants are to remain.

  =Onosma= (Golden Drop). _Boragineæ._

    Seeds, sown in the open in spring. Perennial species by
    cuttings in summer.

  =Opuntia= (Prickly Pear, Indian Fig). _Cacteæ._

    Seeds grow readily, sown as soon as ripe in ordinary sandy
    soil, either in the house or out-doors. The joints grow readily
    if laid on sand. It is customary to allow these cuttings to
    dry several days before planting them. See also Cactus.

  =Orach= (_Atriplex hortensis_). _Chenopodiaceæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to stand.

  =Orange= (_Citrus Aurantium_). _Rutaceæ._

    Orange stocks are grown from seeds, which should be
    cleaned and stratified in sand or other material, until sowing
    time. The seeds should not be allowed to become hard
    and dry. Some prefer to let the seeds sprout in the sand
    and then sow them in the nursery, but they must be carefully
    handled. The seeds are usually sown in seed beds, after the
    manner of apple seeds, and the seedlings are transplanted
    the next fall or spring into nursery rows. Care must always
    be exercised in handling orange plants, as they are
    often impatient of transplanting. Oranges grow readily from
    cuttings, although cuttage is not often practiced. Green cuttings,
    handled under a frame, give good results. Mature
    wood, either one or two years old, can be treated after the
    manner of long grape cuttings. They must have an abundance
    of moisture. Layers are sometimes made.

    The named varieties are shield-budded upon other stocks.
    Grafting can be practiced, but it is often unsatisfactory.
    The nursery stocks are commonly budded in the spring, after
    having grown in the rows one year, which is two years from
    the sowing of the seed. If thorn-bearing varieties are to be
    propagated, a thorn with a bud in its axil is often cut with
    the bud, to serve as a handle in place of the leaf stalk, which
    is used in summer budding. Many stocks are used for the
    orange. The leading ones are sweet or common orange, sour
    orange (_Citrus Aurantium_, var. _Bigaradia_), pomelo (var. _pomelana_
    or _decumana_), Otaheite orange, trifoliate orange (_Citrus
    trifoliata_), and various lemons, as the "French" or Florida
    Rough and the Chinese. For general purposes, the sweet
    and sour orange stocks are probably the best. The sour
    stock is obtained from wild seeds, this variety having extensively
    run wild in Florida from early times. The trifoliate
    and Otaheite stocks are used for dwarfing or for small growing
    sorts, as many of the Japanese varieties. The trifoliate
    orange is also one of the hardiest of the orange stocks, and
    its use will probably increase upon the northern limit of the
    orange belt. Old orange trees can be top-budded with ease.
    It is advisable to cut them back a year before the operation
    is performed, in order to secure young shoots. In ordinary
    greenhouse practice, the seedlings of the pomelo make
    good stocks. They can be established in three-inch pots the
    first season, and veneer-grafted the next winter.

  =Orchids.= _Orchideæ._

    The method of propagating these plants must in each species
    be adapted to the habit and mode of growth. The
    easiest and safest plan for the vast majority is by division,
    but seeds, cuttings, layers, offsets, and very rarely roots, are
    also utilized. It is important that artificial means of increase
    should only be adopted where the individual plants are in
    robust health. With many orchids the struggle of life under
    the unnatural conditions we supply, is necessarily severe, and
    any operation which transforms one weak plant into two or
    more weaker ones, is to be deprecated. In cases where the
    only method available necessitates disturbance at the roots,
    consideration must be paid to the constitution of the species,
    for some orchids, even when perfectly healthy, strongly resent
    interference.

    Seeds. In no class of cultivated plants is propagation by
    seeds more difficult and tedious than it is with orchids. In
    all cases, fertilization must be performed by hand. In England,
    the length of time required for the capsules to ripen
    varies from three months to a year. Good seeds form a very
    small proportion of the whole, and it occasionally happens
    that the contents of a capsule will not produce a single plant.
    This, however, as well as the difficulty experienced in England
    in rearing plants to the flowering stage, is primarily
    due to the deficiency of sunlight, and in such a bright climate
    as that of the United States, would not be likely to
    occur. Various methods of sowing are in vogue, such as
    sprinkling over pieces of wood and cork or tree-fern stem,
    and on the top of moss and peat, in which established plants
    of the same or a nearly related species are growing. The
    last is probably the best, but it is always advisable to try
    several methods. Of course, the material on which the seeds
    are scattered must always be kept moist and shaded. The
    period between germination and the development of the first
    root is the most critical in the life of a seedling orchid.
    After they are of sufficient size to handle they are potted off
    into tiny pots, and as they gain strength, are given treatment
    approximating that of adult plants.

    Division. Cypripediums may be taken as an example
    where this is readily done. It is simply necessary to carefully
    shake off the soil from the roots, and by the aid of a
    sharp knife, sever the plant into as many pieces as are required.
    It is always advisable to leave one or more leading
    growths to each portion. This method may be practiced for
    the increase of phaius, masdevallia, sobralia, ada, the evergreen
    section of calanthe, and all of similar habit.

    In nearly all those kinds where the pseudo-bulbs are united
    by a procumbent rhizome, such as occurs in cattleyas, the
    process is slower. It seems to be natural for these plants to
    continue year after year, producing a single growth from the
    old pseudo-bulb. To obtain additional "leads," the rhizomes
    should be cut through in early spring, two or three pseudo-bulbs
    being reserved to each piece. A bud will then push
    from the base of each pseudo-bulb nearest the division, and
    a new lead is formed. The pieces should not be separated
    until this is well established, and three years may sometimes
    be required. Lælia, catasetum, cœlogyne, lycaste, cymbidium,
    zygopetalum, odontoglossum, oncidium, miltonia, etc.,
    are treated in this manner.

    Cuttings.--This method is available for those kinds with
    long, jointed stems, like dendrobium and epidendrum. Just
    before the plants commence to grow, say in February, the
    old pseudo-bulbs are cut up into lengths, and laid on a moist,
    warm surface, such as on a pan of moss in a propagating
    frame. Young offshoots will shortly appear at the nodes,
    and when large enough are potted off with the old piece attached.
    This plan may be used also for barkeria and microstylis.

    It is well to remember that in any method of propagation
    where the pseudo-bulb is divided, the vigor of the young
    plant is proportionate to the amount of reserve material supplied
    it. However suitable the external conditions may be
    for growth, it is for some time entirely dependent for sustenance
    on the old piece from which it springs. _Dendrobium
    Phalænopsis_ is a case in point. If a pseudo-bulb is cut into
    say three pieces, it will take at least two years for the
    young plants to reach flowering strength, but frequently by
    using the entire pseudo-bulb, we can get in a single year a
    growth quite as large as the old one.

    The treatment of young orchids should be founded on
    what suits the parents. As a rule, however, they require
    more careful nursing, and some of the conditions must be
    modified. Drought, intense light and cold draughts must be
    avoided. For many orchids, especially those from equatorial
    regions, where the atmospheric conditions alternate between
    saturation and intense heat and dryness, it is necessary, in
    order to induce flowering, that nature, to some extent at least,
    should be imitated. With young plants, by whatever method
    they may be obtained, the supply of water must only be reduced
    in accordance with the weather and season, and beyond
    that, no attempt at resting made. In cases, however,
    where plants have been divided or made into cuttings, a very
    limited supply of water is needed at first; but to prevent exhaustion,
    the atmosphere should always be kept laden with
    moisture.

  =Oreopanax.= _Araliaceæ._

    Seeds, and cuttings of the young shoots, or division of well
    established plants.

  =Ornithogalum= (Star of Bethlehem). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Commonly by bulbels, and by division of the
    clumps.

  =Ornus.= See Fraxinus.

  =Orobus= (Bitter Vetch). _Leguminosæ._

    Readily propagated by seeds, or by dividing the tufts.

  =Orontium.= _Aroideæ._

    Commonly increased by division, but seeds may be used.

  =Orpine.= See Sedum.

  =Osage Orange.= See Maclura.

  =Osier.= See Salix and Cornus.

  =Osmanthus= (Japan Holly). _Oleaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings under glass, or by grafting on osmanthus
    stock, or on privet.

  =Osmunda= (Flowering Fern). _Filices._

    Mostly by division; sometimes by spores. See Ferns.

  =Ostrya= (Hop Hornbeam, Ironwood). _Cupuliferæ._

    Best grown from seeds. Also increased by layering; or it
    can be grafted. The European species is often grafted upon
    the hornbeam (carpinus).

  =Othonna=, Aristotela, including Doria (Ragwort). _Compositæ._

    Very easily propagated by seeds and cuttings. The leaves
    also take root.

  =Ouvirandra= (Lattice-leaf). _Naiadaceæ._

    The plants are divided, or seeds are used when they can
    be obtained.

  =Oxalis.= _Geraniaceæ._

    Seeds, divisions and cuttings. The tuberiferous species
    are increased by the small tubers which form upon the roots.

  =Oxycoccus.= See Cranberry.

  =Oxydendron= (Sorrel-tree). _Ericaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, which must be handled carefully in
    light soil. Also by layers, which, however, often root with
    difficulty.

  =Oxylobium=, including Callistachys, Podolobium. _Leguminosæ._

    Increased by seeds and layers. Cuttings of rather firm
    side young shoots, made during spring.

  =Oyster Plant.= See Salsify.

  =Oxytropis.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds should be sown where the plants are to stand; also
    by dividing the plant in spring.


  =Pachira=, Carolinea. _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds. Large cuttings cut at a joint, with the leaves on,
    in heat.

  =Pæony= (Peony, Piney). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds, giving new varieties, are sown as soon as ripe. The
    seedlings seldom rise above the surface the first year, all their
    energies being spent in the formation of roots. The common
    herbaceous varieties are oftenest propagated by division of
    the clumps. Each portion should possess at least one bud
    upon the crown. All woody species may be increased by
    layers and cuttings. Cuttings are taken late in summer, cut
    to a heel, and are handled in a frame or cool greenhouse.
    During winter they should be kept from freezing. The
    shrubby species and _P. Moutan_ are often grafted, and all
    species can be handled in this way. The operation is performed
    in late summer or early autumn, and the grafts are
    stored in sand or moss where they will not freeze. The next
    spring they are planted out. The cion is made from a strong
    short shoot, destitute of flower-buds, and is set upon a piece
    of root, as described and figured on a previous page (p. 88,
    Fig. 85). Some prefer to cut a wedge-shaped portion from
    the side of the stock, in which to set the cion, rather than to
    split the stock; but either practice is good. Strong roots of
    various varieties or species may be used. The Chinese pæony
    (_P. Moutan_), _P. officinalis_ and _P. albiflora_ are probably oftenest
    used.

  =Painted-cup.= See Castilleja.

  =Palafoxia.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds, commonly sown under glass, or in mild climates
    sown in the open.

  =Palicourea.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Cuttings, made in spring under glass.

  =Paliurus=, Aubletia (Christ's Thorn). _Rhamneæ._

    May be increased by seeds, by layers or by cuttings of the
    roots.

  =Palma-Christi.= See Ricinus.

  =Palms.= _Palmæ._

    Palms are mostly grown from imported seeds. These
    should always be sown in a brisk bottom heat, in a mixture
    of coarse loam and sand. A hot-bed, established upon the
    greenhouse bench, is an excellent place in which to start
    palm seeds. Some species are increased by suckers, which
    arise from the crown or roots. For more explicit directions,
    see the various genera.

  =Pampas Grass.= See Gynerium.

  =Panax= (Ginseng). _Araliaceæ._

    Cuttings of stems and roots. Stems of old plants may be
    cut into pieces an inch or two long and inserted in sand in
    heat. Or young plants can be obtained by cutting down the
    tops of strong plants and then separating the suckers which
    arise.

  =Pancratium= and =Hymenocallis=. _Amaryllideæ._

    Seeds, sown in pans in heat, are sometimes employed.
    Commonly increased by offsets, which usually form freely.

  =Pandanus= (Screw Pine). _Pandaneæ._

    Seeds and suckers, as in palms. Also by cuttings of the
    young growth in heat. The "seeds" are really fruits, and
    if in good condition several plants, one to ten, are obtainable
    from each; they should be separated when well furnished
    with roots.

  =Pansy.= See Viola.

  =Papaver= (Poppy). _Papaveraceæ._

    Seeds--usually sown out-doors--and divisions. _P. orientalis_
    and allied species are easily propagated by root-cuttings
    in sandy soil under glass in autumn.

  =Papaw-tree.= See Carica; also Asimina.

  =Papyrus.= _Cyperaceæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds and by divisions, chiefly
    the latter.

  =Pardanthus.= _Irideæ._

    Seeds, divisions, and cuttings of young growth.

  =Paris.= _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds or by divisions.

  =Paris Daisy.= See Marguerite.

  =Parkinsonia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds mostly. Cuttings.

  =Parnassia= (Grass of Parnassus). _Saxifrageæ._

    May be propagated by seeds or by divisions.

  =Parrotia.= _Hamamelideæ._

    Increased by seeds or by layers.

  =Parrya.= _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Parsley= (_Apium Petroselinum_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds, which are usually sown out-doors. The roots may
    be taken up in fall to be forced under glass.

  =Parsnip= (_Pastinaca sativa_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Fresh seeds, sown where the plants are to stand.

  =Parthenium.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown under glass, or in the open.

  =Pasque-flower.= See Anemone.

  =Passiflora= (Passion Flower). _Passifloreæ._

    Seeds, sown under glass. Cuttings of the young growth
    root easily in sand in a frame. Varieties are sometimes
    veneer-grafted, _e. g._, _P. coccinea_.

  =Paulownia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds, sown in carefully prepared soil, either in a seed-bed
    or in a cold-frame. Cuttings of ripe wood or of roots,
    made in fall or spring.

  =Pavonia.= _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds, and green cuttings in a frame.

  =Pea= (_Pisum sativum_). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to stand. The plants
    are hardy and seeds may be sown very early.

  =Peach= (_Prunus Persica_) _Rosaceæ._

    The peach is perhaps the easiest to propagate of all northern
    fruit trees. Stocks are universally grown from seeds,
    although root-cuttings will grow. The seeds should be
    buried out-doors in the fall, and shallow enough so that they
    will be fully exposed to frost. Some prefer to simply spread
    them upon the surface of the ground and cover them lightly
    with straw to prevent them from drying out. The pits
    should be kept moist, and by spring most of them will be
    cracked. Those which do not open should be cracked by
    hand, for if planted they will not germinate until a year
    later than the others. The "meats" or kernels are sorted
    out and planted early in drills. Or some prefer to sprout the
    seeds in the house, in order to select the best for planting.
    Some growers upon a small scale pinch off the tip of the
    rootlet to make the root branch. Pits should be secured, of
    course, from strong and healthy trees, but the opinion that
    "natural seed," or that from unbudded trees, is necessarily
    best, is unfounded.

    The seeds should be planted in rich soil, and the stocks
    will be large enough to bud the same year. Any which are
    not large enough to bud may be cut back to the ground the
    next spring, and one shoot be allowed to grow for budding,
    but such small stocks are usually destroyed, as it does not
    pay to bestow the extra labor and use of land upon them.
    When the buds have grown one season, the trees are ready
    for sale--at one year from the bud and two years from the
    seed. Peach trees are always shield-budded, and the operation
    is fully described on pages 68 to 75. Grafting can be
    done, but as budding is so easily performed, there is no occasion
    for it. The peach shoots are so pithy that, in making
    cions, it is well to leave a portion of the old wood upon the
    lower end--extending part way up the cut--to give the cion
    strength.

    Peaches are nearly always worked upon peaches in this
    country. Plums are occasionally employed for damp and
    strong soils. Myrobolan is sometimes used, but it cannot be
    recommended. All plums dwarf the peach more or less.
    The hard-shell almond is a good stock for very light and dry
    soils. The Peen-to and similar peaches are worked upon
    common peach stocks.

    The nectarine is propagated in exactly the same manner as
    the peach. The ornamental peaches are budded upon common
    peach-stocks in the same manner as the fruit-bearing
    sorts.

    For _Prunus Simoni_, see Plum.

  =Pea-nut= (_Arachis hypogæa_). _Leguminosæ._

    As a field crop, the seeds should be planted where the
    plants are to stand. For propagation in greenhouses, see
    Arachis.

  =Pear=, =Alligator= or =Avocado.= See Persea.

  =Pear= (_Pyrus communis_, _P. sinensis_). _Rosaceæ._

    Pear seedlings are grown in the same manner as those of
    the apple, which see. Pear stocks are mostly imported from
    France, however, as the leaf-blight is so destructive to them
    here as to render their culture unprofitable. This leaf-blight
    is a fungus (_Entomosporium maculatum_), and recent experiment
    has shown that it can be readily overcome by four or
    five thorough sprayings with Bordeaux mixture, so that there
    is reason to hope that the growing of pear stocks may yet
    become profitable in this country. Heretofore, the only
    means of mitigating the ravages of this blight was the uncertain
    one of inducing a strong growth early in the season.
    Even when pear stocks are raised in this country, they are
    grown from imported French seed. Aside from its cheapness,
    however, this foreign seed probably possesses no superiority
    over domestic seed. But pear seed is so difficult to
    obtain in America that it is practically out of the market.

    Pear seedlings should be taken up and removed from the
    seed-bed the first fall. The foreign stocks are imported when
    a year old from the seed. The seedlings are trimmed or
    "dressed" (see page 69), and are set into nursery rows the
    following spring. The next season--that is, the season in
    which the stocks are transplanted--shield-budding is performed,
    as upon the apple. The budding season usually begins
    late in July or early in August in the north. If the
    stocks are small, of "second size," they may stand over winter
    and be budded the second year. Pear trees are sold at
    two and three years from the bud. Pears do not succeed
    well when root-grafted, except when a long cion is used, for
    the purpose of securing own-rooted trees (see page 78). Dormant
    buds of the pear may be used upon large stocks in early
    spring, the same as upon the apple, and buds may be kept
    upon ice for use in early summer (see page 74).

    Pears are dwarfed by working them upon the quince. The
    Angers quince is the best stock. The ordinary orange quince
    and its kin make weak and short-lived trees. Quince stocks
    are obtained from ordinary cuttings or from mound-layering,
    the latter method giving much the better stocks (see Quince).
    The layers should stand until late in autumn of the second
    season when they will be found to be well-rooted, and may
    then be taken off, trimmed up and fitted to plant as stocks
    the following spring, and budded in August. It is imperative
    to set the bud as low as possible in order to secure long-lived
    trees. Some varieties do not unite well with the quince, and
    if it is desired to dwarf them, they should be double-worked
    (see page 91).

    The pear can also be grown upon the apple, thorn and
    mountain ash. Upon the apple it is short-lived, although
    pear cions, set in the top of an old apple tree, often bear
    large fruits for a few years. When pear stocks cannot be
    had, pears are sometimes worked upon apple roots. If the
    cions are long they will emit roots, and when the apple nurse
    fails the pear becomes own-rooted. Good dwarf trees are
    often secured upon the thorn, and there is reason to believe
    that some of the thorns will be found to be preferable to
    quince stocks for severe climates and for special purposes.
    The subject is little understood. The mountain ash is sometimes
    used for the purpose of growing pears upon a sandy
    soil, but its use appears to be of little consequence.

    Pears of the Le Conte and Keiffer type are often grown
    from cuttings in the south. Cuttings are made of the recent
    mature growth, about a foot in length, and are planted in
    the open ground after the manner of long grape cuttings.
    Le Conte, Garber, Smith, and other very strong growers of
    the Chinese type, are probably best when grown from cuttings.
    They soon overgrow French stocks, as also apple
    stocks, which have been used to some extent; but if long
    cions are used, own-rooted trees are soon obtained, and the
    stock will have served a useful purpose in pushing the cion
    the first two or three years.

  =Pecan= (_Hicoria Pecan_). _Juglandeæ._

    Propagated by seeds. These may be planted as soon as
    ripe, or stratified until spring. The ground should be well
    prepared and the nuts planted about 3 inches deep. By
    grafting on pecan or common hickory stock that is not over
    2 years old. Cions about 6 inches long should be cut during
    the winter and put in a cool place to hold them back until the
    stocks have fairly started in the spring. The stalks should
    then be cut off at the crown and the cion inserted. The
    tongue-graft gives the best result. Bandage securely and
    bank with earth nearly to the top of the cion, to keep it
    moist.

  =Pelargonium= (Geranium, Stork's Bill). _Geraniaceæ._

    Seeds, sown in light soil with mild heat, are sometimes
    employed. Commonly increased by cuttings of firm shoots,
    which grow readily (Figs. 52, _e_, and 55). The fancy or
    show geraniums are often grown from root-cuttings, but
    sometimes will not come true. Geraniums can also be
    grafted. (See page 39, herbaceous grafting.)

  =Pelecyphora= (Hatchet Cactus). _Cacteæ._

    Propagated most freely by seeds in moderate heat, and by
    cuttings made of any small shoots that arise from the base
    See also Cactus.

  =Peliosanthes.= _Hæmodoraceæ._

    Suckers.

  =Peltandra.= _Aroideæ._

    Propagated by seeds when fresh, or by division.

  =Pennyroyal= (_Mentha Pulegium_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Pentapetes.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds; by cuttings of half-ripened shoots.

  =Pentas.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Propagated, with difficulty, by seeds or cuttings of half-ripened
    wood.

  =Pentstemon= (Beard-tongue). _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds, sown in pans and placed under a frame; or they
    are sometimes sown in the border where the plants are to
    stand. Also by division, and rarely by cuttings in summer.

  =Peperomia=, including Micropiper. _Piperaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of single joints of firm stems root easily
    in a peaty soil. Water sparingly.

  =Pepper, Black.= See Piper.

  =Pepperidge.= See Nyssa.

  =Pepper-grass=, Curled Cress (_Lepidium sativum_). _Cruciferæ._

    Grown from seeds, either under glass for early crops or in
    the open air.

  =Peppermint= (_Mentha piperita_). _Labiatæ._

    Divisions of the creeping and rooting stems are planted to
    multiply the plant, and plantations are renewed every three
    or four years.

  =Pepper=, =Red= or =Cayenne= (Capsicum). _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds, sown out-doors, or in the north oftener started
    in the house.

  =Pereskia= (Barbadoes Gooseberry). _Cacteæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, as described under Cactus. _P. aculeata_
    is much used as a stock for epiphyllums. _P. Bleo_ is sometimes
    used for the same purpose, as it is fully as good as the
    other species. Cuttings of _P. aculeata_ can be made a foot or
    more in length, and of sufficient size for immediate use, or,
    indeed, the graft may be inserted when the cutting is made.

  =Perilla=, Dentidia. _Labiatæ._

    Sow the seeds in early spring in pans or boxes, and place
    in a gentle heat. Or southwards, seeds may be sown in the
    open.

  =Periploca.= _Asclepiadeæ._

    Seeds. Increased mostly by layers or cuttings under glass,
    during summer or autumn. Root-cuttings succeed.

  =Periwinkle.= See Vinca.

  =Pernettya.= See Canarina.

  =Persea= (Alligator or Avocado Pear). _Laurineæ._

    Seeds. Layers of ripened shoots may be made in autumn,
    or cuttings of firm shoots in spring, under glass.

  =Persimmon= (_Diospyros Kaki_ and _D. Virginiana_). _Ebenaceæ._

    Stocks are readily grown from seed, and they usually
    attain sufficient size for budding the first year. The native
    persimmon (_Dispyros Virginiana_) is largely used as a stock
    for the Japanese persimmon or kaki. Imported stocks are
    occasionally employed, but the native is more vigorous, as a
    rule, and probably better. Persimmons are shield-budded
    the same as peaches, and they may be root-grafted and top-grafted
    by ordinary methods.

  =Persoonia=, Linkia. _Proteaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of the ripened shoots, under glass.

  =Peruvian Bark.= See Cinchona.

  =Petalostemon= (Prairie Clover). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Petunia.= _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds, either in-doors or in the garden. Choice and double
    varieties are often increased by cuttings, which grow readily.

  =Phacelia=, Eutoca, Whitlavia. _Hydrophyllaceæ._

    The annuals are increased by seeds, and the perennials
    by seeds and divisions.

  =Phædranassa=, including Leperiza (Queen Lily). _Amaryllideæ._

    Propagated by seeds and bulbels.

  =Phaius.= _Orchideæ._

    Division of the bulbs. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Phalænopsis.= _Orchideæ._

    These are very slow and difficult to propagate. In the
    majority of the species it can only be done where a lateral
    off-shoot is made from the main stem. Some species, such as
    _P. Luddemanniana_, and more rarely _P. amabilis_, _P. Stuartiana_
    and _P. Schilleriana_, develop plantlets on the old flower
    scapes. By pegging these down on a basket of moss they
    may be established and afterwards separated. _P. Stuartiana_
    and _P. deliciosa_ have been known to produce plants on the
    roots. Other instances of root-proliferation are recorded in
    _Saccolabium micranthum_ and a species of cyrtopodium. (See
    under Orchids.)

  =Phalaris.= _Gramineæ._

    Propagated by seeds, but the sports by divisions.

  =Phaleria=, Drimyspermum. _Thymelæaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in heat in spring; or by cuttings
    of the young shoots, which should be inserted in bottom
    heat.

  =Pharbitis.= See Ipomœa.

  =Phaseolus= (Bean, Kidney, Pole, String; French Bean, etc.).
    _Leguminosæ._

    The ornamental greenhouse kinds are grown from seeds
    planted in light soil in a warm propagating house. See Bean.

  =Phebalium.= _Rutaceæ._

    May be increased by cuttings of the young wood, under a
    glass.

  =Phellodendron= (Cork Tree). _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, layers and by root-cuttings.

  =Philadelphus= (Mock Orange, Syringa). _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds, layers, suckers and cuttings. Layers are most
    used. Cuttings of mature wood are sometimes employed.
    Some well-marked varieties, like vars. _nana_ and _aurea_ of _P.
    coronarius_, are grown from cuttings of soft wood in summer
    in frames.

  =Phillyrea= (Jasmine Box, Mock Privet). _Oleaceæ._

    Seeds. May be propagated by cuttings, layers, or by
    grafting on the privet.

  =Philodendron.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by seeds; and by dividing the stems, allowing
    two or three joints to each piece, inserting them in pots in a
    brisk heat.

  =Phlomis.= _Labiatæ._

    All of the species may be increased by seeds; the herbaceous
    kinds by divisions, and the shrubby sorts also by cuttings.

  =Phlox.= _Polemoniaceæ._

    The annuals are grown from seeds sown in the open. The
    perennials are grown from seeds, divisions, cuttings of stems
    and roots. Cuttings made during summer, and handled in a
    frame, do well. The roots are cut into short pieces, and are
    then handled in pans or flats under cover.

  =Phœnix=, Elate (Date Palm). _Palmæ._

    Increased by imported seeds, sown in a sandy soil, in a
    mild hot-bed. Also by suckers. See also Date.

  =Phormium= (Flax Lily, or New Zealand Flax). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Also by division of the crowns before growth
    commences in spring.

  =Photinia=, including Eriobotrya. _Rosaceæ._

    Stratified seeds or half-ripened cuttings under glass. The
    loquat, _P. Japonica_, is grown from layers or cuttings of
    ripe wood, and it is worked upon seedling stocks or upon
    thorn or quince, after the manner of pears.

  =Phylica.= _Rhamneæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of growing shoots may be inserted in
    sandy soil, in a warm house.

  =Phyllanthus=, including Xylophylla. _Euphorbiæceæ._

    Increased by means of cuttings of hard shoots in heat.

  =Phyllis.= _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds, or cuttings under glass.

  =Phyllocactus=, including Phyllocereus and Disocactus (Leaf Cactus).
    _Cacteæ._

    Seeds germinate readily in sandy soil. Usually increased
    by cuttings of the stems, five or six inches long, placed in
    sandy soil, which is kept only slightly moist. See also
    Cactus.

  =Phyllocladus=, Thalamia (Celery-leaved Pine-Tree). _Coniferæ._

    Cuttings of the ripened shoots under glass, in spring.
    When the cuttings begin callusing, give mild bottom heat.

  =Physalis= (Ground or Winter Cherry, Strawberry Tomato, Husk Tomato).
    _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds, sown out-doors or under cover. Perennials by
    division and growing cuttings.

  =Physianthus=, Schubertia. _Asclepiadeæ._

    Seeds, usually started in heat. Cuttings of firm shoots
    usually side shoots, under glass.

  =Physochlaina.= _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of soft wood.

  =Phyteuma=, Rapunculus (Horned Rampion). _Campanulaceæ._

    Easily increased by seeds or by divisions, in spring.

  =Phytolacca= (Spoke, Skoke, Poke). _Phytolaccaceæ._

    May be propagated by means of seeds, or by divisions.

  =Picea.= _Coniferæ._

    Propagated by seeds, sometimes by layers, or grafts. _P.
    excelsa_ (Norway spruce) makes a good stock; the veneer
    graft, under glass, in winter, succeeds better than any
    method of out-door work practicable in our climate; if the
    graft is inserted near the base in young plants, it is quite possible
    to obtain them on their own roots after a few transplantings.
    Side-shoots can be used as cions, and if started
    in time will furnish good leaders; sometimes a leader is
    developed more rapidly by bending the plant over at nearly
    a right-angle, when a stout bud may start from the stem.
    See Abies.

  =Pickerel Weed.= See Pontederia.

  =Picotee.= See Dianthus and Carnation.

  =Pilea= (Artillery Plant, Stingless Nettle). _Urticaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, divisions or cuttings.

  =Pilocereus.= See Cactus.

  =Pimelea=, Banksia. _Thymelæaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of growing shoots in moderate heat.

  =Pimpernel.= See Anagallis.

  =Pinanga.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Pinckneya=, Pinknea. _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of the ripened shoots under glass.

  =Pine-apple= (_Ananas sativa_). _Bromeliaceæ._

    Pine-apples very rarely produce seeds, but when they are
    produced they are sown for the purpose of obtaining new varieties.
    The pine-apple is usually increased by suckers and
    "crowns." If the root is left in the ground after the pine is
    removed, suckers will start from it. The root is then taken
    up and cut into as many pieces as there are suckers, each
    piece being then permanently planted. The crown of the
    fruit and the various offsets or "crownlets," which appear
    on the sides and base of the fruit, may be removed and used
    as cuttings. These offsets are commonly used in greenhouse
    propagation. It is the usual practice to allow them to dry
    several days before they are planted, and in pine-apple regions
    they are often exposed to the sun for several weeks.
    This operation is unnecessary, however, although it is not
    objectionable. A good way to start the offsets is to pull off
    the lowest leaves and insert the offsets in damp moss in shade--giving
    bottom heat for greenhouse work--and as soon as
    roots begin to form, which will occur in from two to six
    weeks, plant them out permanently. In the tropics fruit can
    be obtained in 20 months after the offsets are transplanted;
    but fruit-bearing is often delayed three or four years under
    poor treatment.

  =Piney.= See Pæony.

  =Pinguicula= (Butterwort). _Lentibularieæ._

    The hardy and greenhouse species are increased by seeds.
    divisions, or by leaf cuttings.

  =Pink= (Dianthus, various species). _Caryophylleæ._

    Seeds and divisions. Best results are obtained by raising
    new plants from seed every two or three years. Seeds are
    usually sown where the plants are to remain; or they may
    be sown in a cold-frame and transplanted.

  =Pinus= (Pine). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds, which should be kept dry over winter, are commonly
    employed. These are often started in pots, but for
    most species they are sown in well-prepared beds out-doors.
    The seedlings must usually be shaded the first season. Varieties,
    as also species which do not produce seed freely, may
    be grafted upon stocks of white or Austrian pine or other
    species. This grafting may be done upon the tips of growing
    shoots early in the season (page 90), but it is oftener performed
    upon potted plants by the veneer method.

  =Piper=, Cubeba (Pepper, Cubeb). _Piperaceæ._

    Seeds. All are increased by means of cuttings of the growing
    shoots, inserted in sandy soil under glass.

  =Piscidia= (Fish Poison-tree, Jamaica Dogwood). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of growing shoots under glass.

  =Pistacia.= _Anacardiaceæ._

    Seeds, cuttings and layers. The pistacio-nut or "green
    almond" (_P. vera_) is usually grown from seeds, which are
    planted where the trees are to stand. It is sometimes grafted
    upon _P. terebinthus_, to give it greater vigor.

  =Pitcairnia.= See Billbergia.

  =Pitcher-plant.= See Nepenthes and Sarracenia.

  =Pittosporum.= _Pittosporeæ._

    Seeds, and by cuttings of the growing or ripe wood, under
    glass.

  =Planera= (Planer-tree). _Urticaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be handled like elm
    seeds.

  =Plane-tree.= See Platanus.

  =Plantago= (Plantain). _Plantagineæ._

    Seeds. The perennial species also by division.

  =Plantain= (fruit). See Banana.

  =Platanus= (Plane-tree, Button-wood; Sycamore, improperly).
    _Platanaceæ._

    Usually propagated by seeds, but layers and ripe wood
    cuttings may be employed.

  =Platycerium= (Stag's-Horn Fern). _Filices._

    Chiefly by division. See Ferns.

  =Platycodon=, Wahlenbergia. _Campanulaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and, when old plants are obtainable,
    by division.

  =Plectocomia.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds. May be increased by suckers.

  =Pleroma=, Lasiandra, including Melastoma. _Melastomaceæ._

    Seeds. Propagated mostly by cuttings of growing shoots
    in a close frame at any season.

  =Plum= (_Prunus_, many species). _Rosaceæ._

    There are so many species of plums in cultivation, and
    the varieties of the same species are often so different in
    constitution and habit, that it is difficult to give advice concerning
    their propagation. All the species grow readily from
    fresh, well-ripened seeds. The pits should be removed from
    the pulp and then stratified until spring. If they are allowed
    to freeze, the germination will be more uniform, as the pits
    will be more easily opened by the swelling embryo. Plum
    pits are rarely cracked by hand. The strong-growing species
    and varieties, especially southwards, will give stocks strong
    enough to bud the first season; but the weaker ones must
    stand until the next season after the seeds are planted. In
    all the northern states, however, plum pits are usually sown
    in seed-beds, in the same manner as apple and pear seeds.
    The seedlings are taken up in the fall, and the following
    spring set out in nursery rows, where they are budded in
    August.

    Plums are extensively grown from suckers, which spring
    in great numbers from the roots of many species. In France
    this method of propagation is largely used. So long as
    graftage does not intervene, the sprouts will reproduce the
    variety; and even in grafted or budded trees this sometimes
    occurs, but it is probably because the tree has become own-rooted
    from the rooting of the cion. It is a common notion
    that trees grown from suckers sprout or sucker worse than
    those grown from seeds. Layers are also extensively employed
    for the propagation of the plum. Strong stools (page
    35) are grown, and the long and strong shoots are covered in
    spring throughout their length--the tips only being exposed--and
    every bud will produce a plant. Strong shoots of vigorous
    sorts will give plants strong enough the first fall to be
    removed into nursery rows. Mound-layering is also employed
    with good results. Root-cuttings, handled like those
    of blackberry, grow readily, but some growers suppose that
    they produce trees which sucker badly. Many plums grow
    readily from cuttings of the mature recent wood, treated the
    same as long grape cuttings. This is especially true of the
    Marianna and its kin (_P. umbellata_), which are grown almost
    entirely from cuttings. Some sorts of the common garden
    plum (_P. domestica_) also grow from cuttings.

    Plums are worked in various ways, but ordinary shield-budding
    is usually employed in late summer or early fall, as
    for peaches and cherries. Root-grafting by the common
    whip method is sometimes employed, especially when own-rooted
    trees are desired (page 78). In the north and east,
    the common plum (_P. domestica_) is commonly worked upon
    stocks of the same species. These stocks, if seedlings, are
    apt to be very variable in size and habit, and sometimes half
    or more of any batch, even from selected seeds, are practically
    worthless. Stocks from inferior or constant varieties
    are therefore essential. Such stocks are largely imported;
    but there are some varieties which can be relied upon in this
    country. One of the best of these domestic stocks is the
    Horse plum, a small and purple-fruited variety of _Prunus
    domestica_, which gives very uniform seedlings. This is largely
    used in New York. The French stocks which are in most
    common use are St. Julien and Black Damas. The Myrobolan
    (_P. cerasifera_) is much used in California for standards,
    but in the east it makes dwarf trees. The peach is often
    used as a plum stock, and it is valuable in the south, especially
    for light soils. In the north plum stocks are better.
    Almond stocks, especially for the French prune and for light
    soils, are considerably used in California. The apricot is
    sometimes employed, but results appear to be poor or indifferent,
    on the whole. Prunes thrive upon the above stocks
    also.

    Various stocks dwarf the plum. The chief dwarf stock at
    present is the Myrobolan. This is usually imported. It is
    easily grown, either from seeds or cuttings. The Mirabelle,
    a foreign stock, is sometimes used. The many species of
    native plums, of the _Prunus Americana_ and _P. angustifolia_
    (Chickasaw) types, are good stocks for dwarf or intermediate
    trees. In most cases, the bud or graft grows luxuriantly for
    two or three years, and thereafter grows rather slowly. It
    is best to bud or graft low upon these stocks. The Marianna
    is at present the most popular native stock.

    The native or American plums are budded upon native
    seedlings, or rarely upon _Prunus domestica_ seedlings; or they
    are grown from cuttings, as in the case of Marianna.

    The Japanese plums are worked upon peach, common
    plum or upon natives, preferably Marianna.

    _Prunus Simoni_ works upon peach, common plum, Myrobolan
    and Marianna.

    The ornamental plums are worked upon the same stocks
    as the fruit-bearing sorts. See Prunus.

  =Plum, Coco.= See Chrysobalanus.

  =Plumbago= (Leadwort). _Plumbagineæ._

    Seeds, divisions and cuttings. Cuttings are made from
    firm nearly mature wood, and should be given mild bottom
    heat.

  =Plumeria=, Himatanthus. _Apocynaceæ._

    Seeds. Make cuttings of ripe shoots, and place under glass.

  =Podalyria.= _Leguminosæ_

    Readily increased by seeds. Divisions do not succeed well.
    In spring, cuttings may be made of strong side shoots, and
    planted in sand under glass.

  =Podocarpus= _Coniferæ._

    Usually grown from cuttings of firm wood under cover.

  =Podophyllum= (May-Apple, Mandrake; erroneously Duck's Foot)
    _Berberideæ._

    Seeds and division.

  =Poinciana.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation by seeds.

  =Poinsettia=, Euphorbia. _Euphorbiaceæ_

    Cuttings of growing shoots, of two or three buds each,
    handled upon a cutting bench or in a frame. Many propagators
    prefer to let the cuttings lie exposed two or three days
    before setting them. Cuttings of ripened wood can be used
    to good advantage where the heat is rather low. See Euphorbia.

  =Polanisia.= _Capparideæ._

    Seeds, in-doors or in the open.

  =Polemonium.= _Polemoniaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by division.

  =Polianthes= (Tuberose). _Amaryllideæ._

    Increased by bulbels. Remove these from the parent bulb
    in the fall, and keep in a warm, dry place until the following
    spring. The soil should be light, rich and moist throughout
    the summer. Before frost comes in the fall, take the bulbs
    up, and when dry, cut off the leaves. The bulbs should be
    kept as during the preceding winter, and the culture during
    the following year is the same as during the first. The bulbs
    usually flower the second or third summer.

  =Polyanthus.= See Primula.

  =Polycarpæa.= _Caryophylleæ._

    The annuals are increased by seeds; perennials by cuttings.

  =Polygala= (Milkwort). _Polygaleæ._

    Seeds; sometimes by division, and by cuttings of young
    shoots under cover, particularly for tropical species.

  =Polygonatum= (Solomon's Seal). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seed and by divisions.

  =Polygonum= (Knot-Grass or Weed). _Polygonaceæ._

    Seeds. The perennials are also increased by divisions of
    the root-stocks, and by cuttings.

  =Polypodium= (Polypody). _Filices._

    Divisions usually. See Ferns.

  =Pomegranate= (_Punica granatum_). _Lythrœrieæ._

    Largely by seeds, and all varieties are increased by cuttings,
    suckers, layers, and scarce sorts by grafting on a common
    sort.

  =Pomelo=, Shaddock (_Citrus Aurantium_, var. _pomelana_). _Rutaceæ._

    Usually grown from seeds, but it may be budded upon pomelo
    or orange stocks, as in the Orange, which see.


  =Pontederia= (Pickerel Weed). _Pontederiaceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Mostly by divisions.

  =Poppy.= See Papaver.

  =Populus= (Poplar, Aspen, Cotton-wood). _Salicineæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as ripe and raked in light soil. Suckers
    are also used. Most often increased by cuttings of ripe
    wood, taken in fall and spring. The weeping forms are
    stock-grafted upon upright sorts, as P. grandidentata.

  =Portugal Laurel.= See Prunus.

  =Portulaca= (Purslane, Rose Moss). _Portulaceæ._

    The annuals are raised from seed. Varieties are sometimes
    propagated by cuttings.

  =Potato= (_Solanum tuberosum_). _Solanaceæ._

    Tubers, either whole or variously divided. Also rarely
    stem cuttings. (See page 52.)

  =Potentilla=, including Horkelia, Sibbaldia (Cinquefoil, Five-Finger).
    _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds, layers, divisions, green cuttings.

  =Poterium=, including Sanguisorba (Burnet). _Rosaceæ._

    The herbaceous kinds are increased by seeds. The shrubs
    are raised from soft cuttings, under glass.

  =Premna=, Baldingera. _Verbenaceæ._

    Seeds and soft cuttings.

  =Prickly Ash.= See Zanthoxylum.

  =Prickly Pear.= See Opuntia.

  =Pride of India.= See Melia.

  =Priestleya=, including Achyronia. _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of very young wood, under cover.

  =Prim.= See Ligustrum.

  =Primula=, Polyanthus (Primrose, Cowslip). _Primulaceæ._

    Seeds, sown carefully in very fine soil, under glass. Some
    rare sorts are increased by division.

  =Prinos.= See Ilex.

  =Pritchardia.= _Palmæ._

    Increased by seeds.

  =Privet.= See Ligustrum.

  =Prostanthera= (Australian Mint). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, divisions, and cuttings of growing shoots, usually
    by the last method.

  =Protea=, Erodendron. _Proteaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of growing wood, under cover.

  =Prune.= See Plum.

  =Prunus=, Amygdalus. _Rosaceæ._

    The dwarf almonds (_Amygdalus_) are increased by seeds,
    divisions, cuttings, and by budding upon seedling plum or
    peach stocks; also by root-cuttings. Peach stocks give larger
    trees at first than plum stocks, but the trees are not so long-lived.
    Perhaps ten years may be considered the average life
    of most ornamental almonds upon the peach, while upon the
    plum they may persist twenty-five years or more. The ornamental
    cherries, peaches, etc., are propagated in essentially
    the same manner as the fruit-bearing varieties. See Almond,
    Apricot, Cherry, Peach, Plum. _P. Lauro-Cerasus_ and _P.
    Lusitanica_, the cherry laurel and Portugal laurel, may be
    propagated by short cuttings of ripened wood, in a cool
    greenhouse in autumn. _P. Pissardii_ is said to be easily propagated
    by cuttings of the soft wood. This method succeeds
    well with many of the double-flowering plums and cherries,
    if the wood is grown under glass.

  =Pseudotsuga.= _Coniferæ._

    Propagated the same as Abies, which see.

  =Psidium.= See Guava.

  =Psoralea.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, divisions and cuttings of growing shoots, placed
    under glass. The tubiferous species, as the pomme blanche
    or Indian potato (_P. esculenta_) are increased by tubers or
    divisions of them.

  =Ptelea= (Hop-tree). _Rutaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, sown in autumn or stratified, or by layers.
    The varieties may be grafted on the common forms.

  =Pteris= (Brake, Bracken). _Filices._

    Easily grown from spores. See Ferns.

  =Pterocarya.= _Juglandeæ._

    Increased by seeds, suckers and layers.

  =Ptychosperma=, Seaforthia (Australian Feather-palm). _Palmæ._

    Seeds.

  =Pulmonaria.= See Mertensia.

  =Pumpkin= (_Cucurbita_, three species). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, when the weather is settled.

  =Punica.= See Pomegranate.

  =Puschkinia=, Adamsia. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by dividing the bulbs, which should be done
    every two or three years.

  =Pyrethrum.= See Chrysanthemum.

  =Pyrola= (Shin-leaf, Wintergreen). _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by division; very rarely from seeds.

  =Pyrus.= _Rosaceæ._

    The ornamental species and varieties of apples and crabs
    are budded or grafted upon common apple stocks. The
    mountain ashes are grown from stratified seeds, which usually
    lie dormant until the second year, or the varieties are
    budded or grafted upon stocks of the common species (_P.
    Aucuparia_). Layers and green cuttings are occasionally employed
    for various species and varieties of pyrus. See also
    Apple, Pear, Quince. It is a good plan to obtain stocks as
    nearly related to the plant which is to be propagated as possible;
    _e. g._, Parkman's pyrus does better on _P. floribunda_
    than on the common apple stock.


  =Quamoclit.= See Ipomœa.

  =Quassia.= _Simarubeæ._

    Cuttings of ripe shoots under glass.

  =Quercus= (Oak). _Cupuliferæ._

    Stocks are grown readily from seeds, which may be sown in
    the fall without stratification. The evergreen species are
    sometimes grown from cuttings. Varieties are grafted on
    stocks grown from wild acorns. The stocks are potted in
    the fall and the grafting is performed in January and February,
    or sometimes in August.

  =Quince= (_Pyrus Cydonia_, _P. Japonica_, _P. Cathayensis_). _Rosaceæ._

    All quinces can be grown from seeds, the same as apples
    and pears; but seeds are not common in the market, and
    are therefore little used in this country. The fruit-bearing
    quinces are propagated most cheaply by means of cuttings
    of mature wood. The cuttings are taken in the fall, and are
    stored in sand, moss or sawdust until spring, when they are
    planted out-doors. Long cuttings--10 to 12 inches--are usually
    most successful, as they reach into uniformly moist earth.
    Cuttings are usually made of the recent wood, and preferably
    with a heel, but wood two or three years old will usually
    grow. With some varieties and upon some soils, there is
    considerable uncertainty, and layerage is therefore often employed.
    Mound-layering (see page 35) is practiced where
    extra strong plants are required. Long root-cuttings, treated
    like those of the blackberry and raspberry, will also grow.
    Many nurserymen bud or root-graft the better varieties
    upon stocks of Angers or other strong sorts. These
    stocks are imported or grown from seeds or cuttings. The
    Chinese quince succeeds upon the common quince. In order
    to secure extra strong plants and a uniform stand, some
    growers graft quince cuttings upon pieces of apple or pear
    roots. In such cases the plants should be taken up in the
    fall, when the quince will be found to have sent out roots of
    its own; the apple root should be removed, and the quince
    replanted the following spring in the nursery row, otherwise
    suckers frequently spring from the stock and interfere with
    the growth of the quince. The union is sufficient to nurse
    the cion for two or three years.

    The flowering or Japanese quince is best propagated by
    short root-cuttings, which are usually made in the fall, and
    scattered in drills in frames or in a well-prepared border in
    spring. Cuttings of firm, nearly mature wood, handled in
    frames, will grow, but they are not often used. The double
    varieties are root-grafted upon common stocks of _P. Japonica_
    in winter. The plants are then grown on in pots. Common
    quince (_P. Cydonia_) stocks are occasionally used, but they
    are not in favor.

  =Quisqualis.= _Combretaceæ._

    Increased by heeled cuttings of young shoots in heat.


  =Radish= (_Raphanus sativus_). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, usually sown where the plants are to grow.

  =Ragged Robin.= See Lychnis.

  =Ramondia=, Myconia. _Gesneraceæ._

    Propagated by seeds or division.

  =Rampion= (_Campanula Rapunculus_). _Campanulaceæ._

    Seeds, where the plants are to stand.

  =Ranunculus= (Buttercup, Crowfoot). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by divisions.

  =Raphia.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds.

  =Raphiolepis.= _Rosaceæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by cuttings of the growing shoots
    inserted under cover.

  =Raspberry= (_Rubus neglectus_, _strigosus_ and _occidentalis_).
    _Rosaceæ._

    New varieties are obtained from seeds, which are washed
    from the pulp and sown immediately, or stratified. The
    black-cap varieties are grown mostly from root-tips (Fig. 18)
    as described on page 32. If the ground is loose and mellow,
    the tips will commonly take root themselves, but upon
    hard ground the tip may have to be held in place by a stone
    or clod. Some strong-growing varieties, like the Gregg,
    especially in windy localities, may have to be held down.
    The red varieties increase rapidly by means of suckers which
    spring up from the roots. Better plants are obtained by
    means of root-cuttings, however, as described under Blackberry
    (see also Fig. 46). Black-caps may be increased by
    root-cuttings. These cuttings are best handled in warm cold-frames
    or mild hot-beds, being planted very early in spring.
    By the time the weather is settled, they will be large enough
    to plant in nursery rows.

  =Red-bud.= See Cercis.

  =Red Cedar.= See Juniperus.

  =Reinwardtia=, Linum in part, of gardeners. _Lineæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of strong shoots in heat.

  =Renanthera.= See Ærides.

  =Reseda= (Mignonette). _Resedaceæ._

    Seeds. For winter flowering, seeds are sown in July.
    Also grown from cuttings.

  =Retinospora=, Chamæcyparis (Japanese Arbor-Vitæ). _Coniferæ._

    Grown sometimes from seeds, which should be denuded of
    pulp. Layers of tender branches are sometimes employed.
    They are most commonly grown from cuttings. These are
    made from tips of growing or ripened shoots, and are two or
    three inches long, with all the leaves left on. They are
    usually, from necessity, variously branched. The soft cuttings
    are usually taken from forced plants and are handled
    in a close frame or under a bell-glass, with bottom heat. In
    commercial establishments the cuttings of ripe wood are
    preferred. The following is the practice of one of the largest
    nurseries in the country: Cuttings of the entire season's
    growth, cut to a heel, are taken in October and November,
    and are placed in sand in boxes in gentle heat, as in a propagating
    house. By February the roots will be formed, and
    the boxes are then placed in a cool house where the temperature
    is about 50°. Early in spring (about April 1st) the
    boxes are placed out-doors in cold-frames, where they remain
    until May, until frost is over. The boxes are then removed
    from the frames and are set on boards in a shady place,
    where they are left until fall. In the fall--having been
    nearly a year in the boxes--the plants are shaken out and are
    heeled-in in a cellar. The next spring they are planted out
    in beds, and during the following summer and winter they
    are given some protection from sun and cold. Yews and
    arbor-vitæs are handled in the same way.

    Retinosporas are often grafted upon retinospora or common
    arbor-vitæ stocks. This operation is usually performed
    upon potted plants in winter by the veneer method.

  =Rhamnus=, including Frangula (Buckthorn). _Rhamneæ._

    The hardy kinds may be increased by means of seeds or
    by layers. The stove and greenhouse species may be multiplied
    by cuttings of growing parts. Seeds should be
    stratified.

  =Rhaphidophora.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by seeds; or by cuttings inserted in peaty soil
    with bottom heat.

  =Rhaphiolepis= (Indian Hawthorn). _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of firm shoots in a frame.

  =Rheum= (Rhubarb, Pie-plant, Wine-Plant). _Polygonaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by divisions. Each division should
    contain at least one bud on the crown. Seeds may be sown
    where the plants are to stand, but will not reproduce the
    varieties.

  =Rhipsalis=, including Lepismium, Pfeiffera. _Cacteæ._

    Cuttings, after having been dried for a few days, should be
    inserted in coarse gravel or sand. See Cactus.

  =Rhodanthe.= _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

  =Rhodochiton.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds; and cuttings of the growing wood

  =Rhododendron=, Azalea (Rose-Bay). _Ericaceæ._

    Seeds are largely employed, but they are small and light
    and must be carefully handled. They are sown in spring in
    pans or boxes in a soil of sandy peat, care being taken to cover
    them very lightly and not to dislodge them when applying
    water. They are handled in cold-frames or in a cool house,
    and the young plants must be shaded. The plants are commonly
    allowed to remain a year in the boxes. Low growing
    plants are often layered. Cuttings of growing wood, cut to a
    heel, are sometimes employed, being made in summer and handled
    in a frame, but the percentage of rooted plants will often
    be small. Rhododendrons are extensively grafted, the veneer
    method being most used. The operation is performed upon
    potted plants in late summer or early fall, or sometimes in a
    cool house in early spring. Most of the leaves are allowed
    to remain upon the cion. The plants are then placed in
    densely shaded cool frames, and are nearly covered with
    sphagnum. Various stocks are employed, but for severe
    climates the hardy species like _R. Catawbiense_ and _R. maximum_
    are probably best. _R. Ponticum_ is extensively used in
    Europe, but it is not hardy enough for the north.

  =Rhodotypos.= See Kerria.

  =Rhubarb.= See Rheum.

  =Rhus= (Sumach). _Anacardiaceæ._

    Seeds, layers, suckers, root-cuttings, and cuttings of green
    or ripe wood. Suckers are oftenest used.

  =Rhynchosia.= _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds and division.

  =Rhynchospermum.= See Trachelospermum.

  =Ribes= (Currant, Gooseberry). _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds, which should be sown as soon as ripe, or else stratified
    for new varieties. Commonly from ripe cuttings. See
    Currant and Gooseberry.

  =Richardia= (Calla) _Aroideæ._

    Offsets, which should be removed and potted off when the
    plants are at rest.

  =Ricinus= (Castor Bean). _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Seeds, which in the north are started in-doors.

  =Rivina=, Piercea (Hoop Withy). _Phytolaccaceæ._

    Readily propagated by seeds; also by cuttings, inserted
    during spring in heat.

  =Robinia= (Locust, Rose Acacia). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, sown in fall or spring, and which usually germinate
    better if soaked in hot water previous to sowing. Also
    grown from layers and root-cuttings. Named varieties are
    grafted or budded, the common locust stock (_R. Pseudacacia_)
    being preferred, even for the rose acacia (_R. hispida_).

  =Rocambole= (_Allium Scorodoprasum_). _Liliaceæ._

    "Cloves," or divisions of the bulb.

  =Rocket=, ornamental sorts. See Hesperis.

  =Rocket Salad= (_Eruca sativa_). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to grow.

  =Rock-Rose.= See Cistus.

  =Romneya.= _Papaveraceæ._

    Propagated by seeds in spring.

  =Romulea.= _Irideæ._

    Offsets.

  =Rondeletia=, Willdenovia, Rogiera. _Rubiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of half-ripened wood, inserted in sand
    under glass, in heat.

  =Rosa= (Rose). _Rosaceæ._

    New varieties and sometimes stocks are grown from seeds,
    which are sown as soon as ripe, or kept in the hips until
    spring. The hardy kinds are usually sown in well-prepared
    beds out-doors. Roses are sometimes grown from layers,
    and often from root-cuttings, after the manner of blackberries.
    The common way of propagating roses, however, is
    by means of short cuttings of firm or nearly mature wood,
    handled under glass, with a mild bottom heat (of 65° or 70°).
    They are commonly made in February or March from forced
    plants. The cuttings are made in various fashions, some
    allowing most of the leaves to remain, and some preferring
    to cut most of them off, as in Fig. 56. They are commonly
    cut to one-bud lengths. Long cuttings of ripened wood,
    handled in a cool greenhouse or in frames, may also be employed
    for the various perpetual and climbing roses. Most
    growers feel that the best plants are obtained from cuttings,
    but most varieties do well when budded upon congenial and
    strong stocks. Budding by the common shield method is
    considerably employed, and veneer-grafting is sometimes
    used. The stocks are grown either from seeds or cuttings.
    The commonest stock is the manetti (_Rosa canina_), which is
    a strong and hardy species. The multiflora rose (_R. polyantha_)
    is also a good stock, especially for early results. A stock
    somewhat used about Boston for some of the hybrid perpetuals,
    with excellent results, is _Rosa Watsonia_, a Japanese
    species. "Worked" roses are in greater favor in Europe
    than in this country.

  =Rosemary= (_Rosmarinus officinalis_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Rubus= (Bramble). _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds, which should be stratified or sown as soon as ripe.
    Root-cuttings and suckers are mostly employed. The seeds
    of _R. deliciosus_ require two years for germination. See Blackberry,
    Dewberry, Raspberry.

  =Rudbeckia=, including Lepachys, Obeliscaria (Cone Flower). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds or divisions.

  =Rue.= See Ruta.

  =Ruellia=, including Dipteracanthus. _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, inserted in a light rich soil, under glass.

  =Rulingia.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings under glass.

  =Ruscus= (Butcher's, Alexandrian Laurel). _Liliaceæ._

    Root suckers. Also seeds, when obtainable.

  =Rush.= See Juncus.

  =Russelia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds. Green cuttings under glass.

  =Ruta.= Haplophyllum (Herb of Grace, Rue). _Rutaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, divisions and cuttings. Meadow
    Rue, see Thalictrum.


  =Sabal.= _Palmæ._

    Propagated by seeds, and by suckers, which should be
    taken when about one foot long. If they have no roots they
    must be carefully handled.

  =Sabbatia= (American Centaury). _Gentianeæ._

    May be raised from seeds, which should be sown thinly
    in pans, or on a shady border.

  =Saffron= (_Carthamus tinctorius_). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seeds, in open air in spring. Saffron is also
    _Crocus sativus_.

  =Sage= (_Salvia officinalis_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring where the plants are to stand. Also
    by division, but seeds give better plants. Sage plantations
    should be renewed every two or three years. Good plants
    are grown from cuttings.

  =Sage Palm.= See Cycas.

  =Saintfoin.= See Onobrychis.

  =Saint John's Bread.= See Carob.

  =Salisburia.= See Ginkgo.

  =Salix= (Willow, Osier, Sallow). _Salicineæ._

    All the willows grow readily from cuttings of ripe wood
    of almost any age. The low and weeping varieties are top-worked
    upon any common upright stocks.

  =Sallow.= See Salix.

  =Salpiglossis.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Propagated by seeds in open air, or they may be started
    under glass.

  =Salsify= (_Tragopogon porrifolius_). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown in spring where the plants are to remain.

  =Salvia=, including Sclarea (Sage). _Labiatæ._

    May be increased by seeds, sown thinly and placed in a
    little warmth. Also by cuttings; these will root readily in
    heat, if they are quite soft and in a growing state.

  =Sambucus= (Elder). _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Seeds, handled like those of raspberries and blackberries.
    Named kinds are grown from cuttings of mature wood, and
    by layers.

  =Sandoricum= (Sandal-tree). _Meliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, in sand under glass, in heat.

  =Sanguinaria= (Blood-root, Red Puccoon). _Papaveraceæ._

    Propagation is effected by means of seeds, or by divisions.

  =Sanguisorba.= See Poterium.

  =Sanseviera=, Salmia (Bowstring Hemp). _Hæmodoraceæ._

    Young plants are obtained from suckers.

  =Sapodilla= or =Sapodilla Plum=. See Sapota.

  =Saponaria=, including Vaccaria (Bouncing Bet, Fuller's Herb,
  Soapwort). _Caryophylleæ._

    Increased by seeds and by divisions. The hardy annual
    and biennial kinds may be simply sown in the open border.

  =Sapota=, Achras. _Sapotaceæ._

    Seeds and cuttings. In tropical countries the sapodilla
    (_S. Achras_) is raised entirely from seeds.

  =Sarracenia= (Indian Cup, Pitcher Plant, Side-saddle Flower. Trumpet
  Leaf). _Sarraceniaceæ._

    Increased by dividing the crowns. Sometimes by seeds,
    sown in moss in a cool frame.

  =Sassafras=. _Laurineæ._

    Increased by seeds, and by suckers and root-cuttings.

  =Satyrium.= _Orchideæ._

    Division of the plants, as new growth is commencing.
    (See also under Orchids.)

  =Saurauja=, Palava, Reinwardtia. _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Seeds. Ripened cuttings should be inserted in sand, under
    glass.

  =Sauromatum.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by offsets.

  =Saussurea.= _Compositæ._

    Seeds; division.

  =Savin.= See Juniperus.

  =Savoy.= See Cabbage.

  =Savory= (_Satureia hortensis_, _S montana_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to remain; or the winter
    savory (_S. montana_), which is a perennial, by division.

  =Saxifraga= (Saxifrage, Rockfoil). _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds, divisions, and in some species (as _S. sarmentosa_, the
    "strawberry geranium") by runners.

  =Scabiosa= (Pin-cushion Flower). _Dipsaceæ._

    Seeds, usually sown in the open, and sometimes by division

  =Scævola.= _Goodenovieæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings should be inserted in a compost of peat
    and sand, under glass.

  =Scheeria.= See Achimenes.

  =Schelhammera=, Parduyna. _Liliaceæ._

    Increased usually by divisions.

  =Schinus.= _Anacardiaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds.

    =Schismatoglottis.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by divisions.

    =Schizandra=, including Maximowiczia. _Magnoliaceæ._

    Seeds, when procurable. Propagation is effected by layers;
    by ripened cuttings, which should be inserted in sand
    under glass.

    =Schizanthus= (Butterfly or Fringe Flower). _Solanaceæ._

    The half-hardy kinds are increased by seeds sown in a little
    heat in spring. The seed of the hardy sorts may be
    sown in the open ground in early spring.

    =Schizophragma.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Propagated easily by cuttings of the ripened wood in a
    cool house in autumn.

    =Schizostylis.= _Irideæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by division.

    =Sciadophyllum=, Actinophyllum. _Araliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, in sand under glass, in moderate heat.

    =Sciadopitys= (Umbrella Pine). _Coniferæ._

    Slowly propagated by imported seeds. But cuttings of
    the half-ripened shoots, taken off in summer and inserted in
    sand, in heat, root readily.

    =Scilla= (Squill, Wild Hyacinth). _Liliaceæ._

    Slowly increased by seeds, usually by bulbels

    =Scolopendrium.= See Ferns.

  =Scorzonera= (Black Salsify). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown where the plants are to stand.

  =Scotch Broom.= See Cytisus.

  =Screw Pine.= See Pandanus.

  =Scutellaria= (Skull-cap, Helmet Flower). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, divisions and cuttings of growing shoots under
    cover.

  =Seaforthia.= See Ptychosperma.

  =Sea-kale= (_Crambe maritima_). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, sown without being shelled, usually in a seed-bed.
    When the young plants have made three or four leaves, they
    should be removed to permanent quarters. Seedlings should
    furnish crops in three years. By root-cuttings, four or five
    inches long, taken from well established plants. These
    should give plants strong enough for cutting in two years.

  =Seaside Grape.= See Coccoloba.

  =Sechium= (Choko). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds. Tubers.

  =Sedge.= See Carex.

  =Sedum=, including Rhodiola (Orpine, Stonecrop). _Crassulaceæ._

    Propagation may be effected by seeds, by divisions of the
    tufts, by cuttings of stems or leaves in spring.

  =Selaginella.= _Lycopodiaceæ._

    Spores. Short cuttings, inserted in very early spring, in
    pots or pans.

  =Sempervivum= (House-Leek). _Crassulaceæ._

    Readily increased by seeds, or by the young plants which
    appear around the old ones at the base.

  =Senecio=, including Cacalia, Cineraria, Farfugium, Jacobea Kleina,
  Ligularia (Groundsel, Ragweed). _Compositæ._

    The annuals are propagated by seeds. Others may be
    increased by seeds, by divisions, or by cuttings both of the
    roots and shoots.

  =Sensitive Plant.= See Mimosa.

  =Sequoia=, Wellingtonia (Redwood). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds, which must be handled in a frame or half-shady
    place. Layers, and cuttings handled like those of retinospora
    and yew.

  =Sericographis.= See Justicia.

  =Sesamum= (Bene). _Pedaliaceæ._

    Seeds, sown under glass, or in the south in the open
    border.

  =Sesbania=, including Agati (Pea-tree). _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds for annual species; the shrubby kinds by cuttings
    of the half-ripened shoots under glass, in heat.

  =Shad-bush.= See Amelanchier.

  =Shaddock.= See Pomelo.

  =Shallot= (_Allium Ascalonicum_). _Liliaceæ._

    Grown from "cloves," which are formed by the breaking
    up of the main bulb.

  =Shell-bark Hickory= (Shag-bark). See Hicoria.

  =Shepherdia= (Buffalo Berry). _Elæagnaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in the fall or stratified until
    spring.

  =Sibbaldia.= See Potentilla.

  =Siberian Pea-tree.= See Caragana.

  =Sideritis.= _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, divisions, cuttings.

  =Side-saddle Flower.= See Sarracenia.

  =Silene= (Campion, Catchfly). _Caryophylleæ._

    Propagation is effected by seeds, by divisions, and by
    cuttings.

  =Silk-Cotton Tree.= See Bombax.

  =Silphium= (Rosin-plant, Compass-plant). _Compositæ._

    Propagated by seed and by divisions.

  =Silver Bell.= See Halesia.

  =Sisyrinchium= (Blue-eyed Grass, Pig Root, Rush Lily, Satin Flower).
    _Irideæ._

    It may be increased in spring by seeds or by divisions.

  =Skimmia.= _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds, in a frame. Also by layers and by firm cuttings in
    gentle heat.

  =Skirret= (_Sium Sisarum_). _Umbelliferæ._

    Seeds, offsets, or divisions.

  =Slipperwort.= See Campanula and Calceolaria.

  =Smilacina= (False Solomon's Seal). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds. Division of roots.

  =Smilax= (Green-Briar, American China Root). _Liliaceæ._

    Young plants are obtained by seeds and by layers and
    divisions of the root. For the "Smilax" or Boston-vine of
    conservatories, see Myrsiphyllum.

  =Snapdragon.= See Antirrhinum.

  =Snowball-tree.= See Viburnum.

  =Snowberry-tree.= See Symphoricarpus.

  =Snowdrop.= See Galanthus.

  =Snowflake.= See Leucoium.

  =Soapwort.= See Saponaria.

  =Solandra.= _Solanaceæ._

    Increased by seeds sown in spring; by cuttings, inserted in
    mould or tan. If small flowering plants are desired, the cuttings
    should be taken from flowering shoots.

  =Solanum=, including Aquartia, Nycterium (Nightshade). _Solanaceæ._

    The annuals, and most of the other species, are raised
    from seeds. The tuberous kinds may be increased by tubers
    or divisions of them. The stove and greenhouse shrubby
    plants may be propagated by cuttings, inserted when young
    in a warm frame.

  =Soldanella.= _Primulaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by division.

  =Solea.= See Ionidium.

  =Solidago= (Golden Rod). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown in fall or spring, and by divisions.

  =Solomon's Seal.= See Polygonatum.

  =Sonerila.= _Melastomaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds; or by cuttings which should be
    inserted singly in small pots during spring and placed in a
    frame in a propagating house.

  =Sophora=, including Edwardsia. _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds, layers and cuttings of either ripened or growing
    wood. The named varieties are grafted upon common stocks.

  =Sorghum.= _Gramineæ._

    Usually by seeds. Sometimes by cuttings as in Sugar
    Cane.

  =Sorrel= (Rumex, several species). _Polygonaceæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Sorrel-tree.= See Oxydendron.

  =Sour Gum.= See Nyssa.

  =Sowbread.= See Cyclamen.

  =Spanish Bayonet.= See Yucca.

  =Sparaxis.= _Irideæ._

    Seeds. Usually by offsets.

  =Sparmannia.= _Tiliaceæ._

    Propagated by cuttings of half-ripened wood in spring.

  =Spathiphyllum,= including Amomophyllum. _Aroideæ._

    Propagated sometimes by seeds sown in heat, or by divisions
    of the root-stocks.

  =Spearmint= (Mentha viridis). _Labiatæ._

    Commonly grown from cuttings of the creeping root-stocks.

  =Speedwell.= See Veronica.

  =Sphæralcea=, Sphæroma (Globe Mallow). _Malvaceæ._

    Seeds; by cuttings of the young growth under glass, and
    kept shaded until rooted.

  =Spiderwort.= See Tradescantia.

  =Spinage= (_Spinacia oleracea_). _Chenopodiaceæ._

    Seeds, sown usually where the crop is to stand, either in
    fall or spring.

  =Spiræa= (Spirea, Meadow-Sweet). _Rosaceæ._

    Seeds, sown as soon as ripe or stratified until spring.
    Commonly increased by cuttings, either of mature or green
    wood. Green cuttings usually make the best plants. These
    are made in summer and handled in frames. Some sorts, as
    _S. ariæfolia_, _S. opulifolia_ and varieties (Nine-bark, now
    known as _Neillia_ or _Physocarpus opulifolia_) and _S. prunifolia_,
    are usually grown from layers put down in spring. The herbaceous
    kinds are often increased by division.

  =Spondias= (Hog Plum, Otaheite Apple or Plum). _Anacardiaceæ._

    Seeds; by large cuttings of growing wood, which should
    be inserted in sand or mould, in heat.

  =Spruce.= See Picea and Abies.

  =Squash= (_Cucurbita_, three species). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, when the weather becomes warm.

  =Squill.= See Scilla.

  =Stachys=, Betonica, Galeopsis (Hedge Nettle, Woundwort). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, divisions, or cuttings. Some species (as the Crosnes
    or _S. tuberifera_ of recent introduction) are increased by
    subterranean tubers.

  =Staff-tree.= See Celastrus.

  =Stanhopea.= _Orchideæ._

    Division of the old roots. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Stapelia= (Carrion Flower). _Asclepiadeæ._

    Seeds; commonly by cuttings in heat.

  =Staphylea= (Bladder-nut). _Sapindaceæ._

    Seeds sown as soon as ripe or stratified until spring. By
    suckers, layers, and cuttings of roots or of mature wood.

  =Star Apple.= See Chrysophyllum.

  =Star of Bethlehem.= See Ornithogalum.

  =Statice= (Sea Lavender, Sea Pink). _Plumbagineæ._

    The annuals and biennials may be increased by seeds
    sown in early spring, in a frame. The perennials by seeds,
    or by carefully made divisions. Greenhouse species should
    be propagated by cuttings inserted in small single pots during
    early spring, and placed under glass.

  =Staurostigma.= _Aroideæ._

    Seeds sown in bottom heat; or by division of the tubers.

  =Stephanotis=, Jasminanthes. _Asclepiadeæ._

    Propagated by seeds; also by cuttings of the previous
    year's growth inserted singly in pots, in spring, and placed in
    a close frame with a temperature of 60°.

  =Sterculia.= _Sterculiaceæ._

    Seeds. Increased by ripened cuttings, which should be
    taken with the leaves on, and placed under glass. Those of
    the stove species should be placed in moist heat.

  =Stevia.= _Compositæ._

    May be increased by seeds, by divisions and by cuttings.

  =Stigmaphyllon.= _Malpighiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of ripened wood, inserted in sandy soil
    under glass, in heat.

  =Stillingia.= _Euphorbiaceæ._

    Easily propagated by imported seeds.

  =Stock.= See Mathiola.

  =Stokesia.= _Compositæ._

    Propagation by seeds and by division.

  =Stonecrop.= See Sedum.

  =Strawberry= (_Fragaria_). _Rosaceæ._

    New sorts are grown from seeds, which are usually sown as
    soon as ripe; or they may be kept until the following spring
    either dry or in stratification. Varieties are commonly increased
    by offsets, or plants formed at the joints of runners.
    These runners appear after the fruit is off. If strong plants
    are desired, the runner should be headed-in, and only one
    plant allowed to form on each runner. The ground should
    be soft and somewhat moist, to enable the young plants to
    obtain a foothold. Plants strong enough for setting are obtained
    in August and September of the same year in which
    they start. Ordinarily, the runners will take root without
    artificial aid; but in hard soils, or with new or scarce varieties,
    the joints are sometimes held down with a pebble or bit
    of earth. New varieties are often propagated throughout the
    season from plants which are highly fertilized, and which are
    not allowed to fruit. Very strong plants are obtained by
    growing them in pots. A 3-inch pot is sunk below the runner,
    and the joint is held upon it by a stone or clod. The
    runner is then pinched off, to prevent further growth, and to
    throw all its energy into the one plant. The pot should be
    filled with soft, rich earth. Shouldered pots are best, because
    they can be raised more easily than others, by catching
    the spade or trowel under the shoulder. The plants will
    fill the pots in three or four weeks, if the weather is favorable.
    Old tin fruit cans, which have been heated to remove
    the bottoms, can also be used.

    Cuttings of the tips of runners are sometimes made and
    handled in a frame, as an additional means of rapidly increasing
    new kinds. These cuttings are really the cast-away
    tips left from the heading-in or checking of the runners.

  =Strawberry Geranium.= See Saxifraga.

  =Strawberry Tree.= See Arbutus.

  =Strelitzia= (Bird of Paradise Flower, Bird's-tongue Flower).
    _Scitamineæ._

    Increased by seeds, which should be sown in light soil, and
    the pots plunged in moist bottom heat. Also increased by
    suckers and by division of the old plants.

  =Streptocarpus= (Cape Primrose). _Gesneraceæ._

    Readily propagated by seeds or by divisions.

  =Strobilanthes=, including Goldfussia (Cone Head). _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, in any light soil under glass, in heat.

  =Struthiola.= _Thymelæaceæ._

    Seeds, when obtainable. Cuttings in sand under a frame.

  =Stuartia.= _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds and layers, or by means of ripened
    cuttings, inserted in sand under a hand-glass. Seeds
    are oftenest used, where obtainable.

  =Stylidium=, Candollea. _Stylidieæ._

    Grown from seeds, or in a few cases, from divisions of the
    roots. The shrubby kinds may be increased by cuttings.

  =Stypandra.= _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by divisions.

  =Styrax= (Storax). _Styraceæ._

    Seeds, which must be stratified, or else sown as soon as
    ripe. They usually lie dormant the first year. Also by layers
    and cuttings of green-wood. Can be grafted upon other
    storaxes, or upon _Halesia tetraptera_.

  =Sugar Cane= (_Saccharum officinarum_). _Gramineæ._

    Cuttings of the stems. The cuttings should possess a nope
    or joint which bears one or more good buds. These cuttings
    are planted directly in the field, and the plants will reach
    maturity in two or three months. Propagation by seeds has
    been supposed to be impossible, but recent experiments at
    Kew indicate that it can be done.

  =Sumach.= See Rhus.

  =Sundew.= See Drosera.

  =Sunflower.= See Helianthus.

  =Sun Rose.= See Helianthemum.

  =Swainsona.= _Leguminosæ._

    Seeds. Green cuttings under cover.

  =Swan River Daisy.= See Brachycome.

  =Sweet Brier.= See Rosa.

  =Sweet Cicely.= See Myrrhis.

  =Sweet Pea.= See Lathyrus.

  =Sweet Potato= (_Convolvulus Batatas_). _Convolvulaceæ._

    Sweet potato plants are grown in hot-beds, cold-frames or
    forcing-houses, from sound tubers of medium size. The tuber
    is laid upon a sandy or other loose bed, and is then covered
    with sand or sandy loam to a depth of one or two inches.
    Sometimes, to guard against rot, the tubers are not covered
    until the sprouts begin to appear. The tubers may be laid
    thickly upon the bed, but they are less apt to rot if they do
    not touch each other. Sometimes the tubers are cut in two
    lengthwise, the cut surface being placed down, in order to
    place all the plant-giving surface uppermost. In four or
    five weeks the young plants--three to five inches high--are
    pulled off and planted, and others soon arise to take their
    places. One hand should be held firmly upon the soil over
    the tuber, while the sprout is pulled off to keep it in place.
    Three or four crops of sprouts may be obtained from each
    tuber.

  =Sweet William= (_Dianthus barbatus_). _Caryophylleæ._

    Seeds, sown in-doors or in the border. Division of the
    plants. Best results are obtained by starting new seedlings
    every other year.

  =Swertia.= _Gertianeæ._

    Seeds, usually started in heat.

  =Sycamore.= See Platanus.

  =Symphoricarpus= (Waxberry, St. Peter's Wort, Snowberry-tree, Indian
  Currant). _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Seeds, handled like those of blackberries. Also by suckers
    and cuttings.

  =Symphytum= (Comfrey). _Boragineæ._

    May be increased by seeds and by division. Also by root-cuttings.

  =Symplocos=, including Hopea. _Styraceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, in sand under glass.

  =Syngonium.= _Aroideæ._

    Increased by dividing the stems into lengths of about three
    joints, and inserting them in pots in a brisk heat. The tops
    of plants may be cut off and inserted as large cuttings.

  =Syringa= (Lilac). _Oleaceæ._

    New varieties and stocks are grown from seeds, which are
    usually stratified until spring. Green cuttings, handled in
    frames in summer, are largely used. Cuttings of mature
    wood will grow; also cuttings of the roots. Layers and
    suckers are often employed. Varieties are extensively grafted
    upon privet (_Ligustrum_), and common lilacs. Flute-budding
    is occasionally employed. Lilacs will grow for a time when
    worked upon the ash. Grafting succeeds well when performed
    in the open air.


  =Tabernæmontana.= _Apocynaceæ._

    Increased by green cuttings, under glass, in moist heat.

  =Tacca=, Ataccia. _Taccaceæ._

    Seeds and division of the roots.

  =Tacsonia.= See Passiflora.

  =Tagetes= (Marigold). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown either in-doors or out.

  =Tamarack.= See Larch.

  =Tamarindus= (Tamarind). _Leguminosæ._

    Young plants may be obtained from seeds sown on a hot-bed
    or out-doors in tropical countries. Cuttings, in sand
    under glass in heat.

  =Tamarix=, Tamarisk. _Tamariscineæ._

    Increased by ripe cuttings under glass, the greenhouse
    kinds in heat.

  =Tansy= (Tanacetum vulgare). _Compositæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Taxodium=, Glyptostrobus (Bald Cypress). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds are usually employed. Layers. Cuttings of young
    wood in wet sand, or even water, under cover. The varieties
    of glyptostrobus may be veneer-grafted in August or September
    on _T. distichum_.

  =Taxus= (Yew). _Coniferæ._

    Seeds, sown when gathered or else stratified. Layers.
    Cuttings of green-wood under glass in summer, or of mature
    wood as recommended for retinospora. The named varieties
    are veneer-grafted in August or early fall upon the upright
    kinds.

  =Tecoma= (Trumpet-Creeper). _Bignoniaceæ._

    Seeds, layers, cuttings of firm shoots, but most commonly
    by root-cuttings.

  =Terminalia= (Tropical Almond). _Combretaceæ._

    Seeds; also by cuttings of green-wood under glass.

  =Ternstrœmia.= _Ternstrœmiaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of the half-ripened shoots under glass, in
    bottom heat.

  =Testudinaria= (Elephant's Foot). _Dioscoreaceæ._

    Grown from imported roots or seeds.

  =Teucrium= (Germander). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds, divisions, and the shrubby kinds by cuttings under
    cover.

  =Thalictrum= (Meadow-Rue). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, and divisions. The varieties by
    cuttings.

  =Thea.= See Camellia.

  =Theobroma= (Cacao, Chocolate-tree). _Sterculiaceæ._

    Propagated by ripened cuttings, which should be placed in
    sand, under glass, in heat.

  =Thermopsis.= _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds and divisions.

  =Thrift.= See Armeria.

  =Thrinax.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds.

  =Thunbergia.= _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of firm wood in a frame.

  =Thunia.= _Orchideæ._

    As the form of the pseudo-bulbs suggests, this genus is
    easily propagated by cuttings. These are made about six
    inches long and inserted in pots of sand. After standing in
    an ordinary propagating-frame or moist stove for a short
    time young growths will appear at the nodes. When large
    enough they are taken up and potted in ordinary compost.
    Two years at least are needed for them to attain to flowering
    size, but this is the best method where a large number of
    plants are wanted. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Thuya=, including Biota (Arbor-Vitæ, White Cedar erroneously).
    _Coniferæ._

    Seeds. Layers. Cuttings of green shoots in summer in a
    cool frame. Cuttings of ripe wood, as recommended for
    retinospora. The named varieties are often grafted on potted
    common stocks in winter or early fall.

  =Thyme= (_Thymus vulgaris_). _Labiatæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Thyrsacanthus=, Odontonema (Thyrse Flower). _Acanthaceæ._

    Seeds; cuttings made in spring, and placed in a close,
    warm frame.

  =Tiarella.= _Saxifrageæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Tigridia= (Tiger Flower). _Irideæ._

    May be increased by seeds, or generally by offsets.

  =Tilia= (Basswood, Linden, Lime-tree). _Tiliaceæ._

    Stocks are grown from stratified seeds. Layers may be
    made, and cuttings may be employed, but the named sorts
    are usually grafted on strong common stocks. Mound-layering
    is sometimes practiced.

  =Tillandsia.= _Bromeliaceæ._

    May be increased by seeds, and by suckers which should
    be allowed to grow large before being detached from the
    parent and should then be inserted singly in pots, in a compost
    of loam, peat, and leaf-mould. Keep moderately moist
    and well shaded. _T. usneoides_ is the "Spanish Moss" of the
    south; rarely propagated, but may be grown from seeds or
    divisions of the moss.

  =Tobacco.= See Nicotiana.

  =Tolu Balsam-tree.= See Myroxylon.

  =Tomato= (_Lycopersicum esculentum_). _Solanaceæ._

    Seeds, usually started under glass. Cuttings of growing
    shoots.

  =Torenia.= _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings, in a warm frame.

  =Torreya.= _Coniferæ._

    Increased the same as Thuya and Retinospora.

  =Trachelium= (Throatwort). _Campanulaceæ._

    Seeds and cuttings.

  =Trachelospermum=, Rhynchospermum. _Apocynaceæ._

    Seeds. Firm cuttings, in a frame.

  =Trachycarpus.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds and suckers.

  =Tradescantia.= _Commelinaceæ._

    Usually by cuttings; also by seeds and divisions.

  =Trapa= (Water Caltrops). _Onagrarieæ._

    Seeds.

  =Tree of Heaven.= See Ailanthus.

  =Trichilia.= _Meliaceæ._

    Seeds. Cuttings of the ripened wood, with leaves, or
    under glass in heat.

  =Trichopilia.= _Orchideæ_.

    Divisions of the plants. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Trichosanthes= (Snake Gourd). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, either in-doors or out.

  =Tricyrtis.= _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds rarely. Offsets and divisions.

  =Trillium= (American Wood-Lily, Indian Shamrock, Wake-Robin).
    _Liliaceæ_.

    Propagated by seeds and by divisions.

  =Triteleia= (Triplet Lily). _Liliaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds and by offsets.

  =Tritoma.= See Kniphofia.

  =Tritonia=, Aletris, including Montbretia. _Irideæ._

    Young plants are raised from seeds; but generally increased
    by divisions.

  =Trollius= (Globe Flower, Globe Ranunculus). _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds. Divisions in early autumn or spring. The seeds
    should be sown fresh or a long time will be required for germination.

  =Tropæolum= (Nasturtium, Canary-bird Flower, Indian Cress).
    _Geraniaceæ_.

    Seeds, started in-doors or in the garden. Tuberiferous
    species by tubers or divisions of roots. Perennials sometimes
    by cuttings in a frame.

  =Trumpet Creeper.= See Tecoma.

  =Tuberose.= See Polianthes.

  =Tulipa= (Tulip). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds may be sown in boxes of light sandy soil, in late
    winter, and placed in a cold-frame. The next season the
    young bulbs should be planted in a prepared bed outside.
    Bulbels may be detached from established bulbs when they
    are lifted, and grown by themselves. This is the usual
    method.

  =Tulip-tree.= See Liriodendron.

  =Tupelo-tree.= See Nyssa.

  =Turnera.= _Turneraceæ._

    Seeds, divisions and cuttings.

  =Turnip= (_Brassica_). _Cruciferæ._

    Seeds, where the plants are to remain.

  =Tydæa.= See Gesnera.

  =Typha= (Bullrush, Cat's Tail, Reed Mace). _Typhaceæ._

    Propagation may be effected by seeds sown in a pot
    plunged in water nearly to the level of the soil; or by
    divisions.


  =Ulex= (Furze, Gorse, Whin). _Leguminosæ._

    Propagated by seeds or by cuttings.

  =Ulmus= (Elm). _Urticaceæ._

    Usually propagated by stratified seeds. Layers are sometimes
    made, and suckers may be taken. The varieties are
    grafted on common stocks.

  =Unicorn Plant.= See Martynia.

  =Uvularia=, including Oakesia (Bellwort). _Liliaceæ._

    Seeds; usually by divisions.


  =Vaccinium= (Swamp Huckleberry, Whortleberry, Blueberry, Bilberry,
  Cranberry). _Vacciniaceæ._

    Seeds, layers, root-cuttings, and divisions of the old plants.
    Some species by hard-wood cuttings, for which see Cranberry.
    Huckleberry seeds are small and somewhat difficult
    to grow. The seeds should be washed from the fruits and
    stored in sand in a cool place until late in winter. They are
    then sown in pans or flats on the surface of a soil made of
    equal parts sand and loam. Cover with fine sphagnum and
    keep in a cool house or frame, always keeping the seeds moist.
    Seeds treated in this way may be expected to germinate in a
    month or two, although they may lie dormant a year. Transplant
    frequently and keep shaded until large enough to shift
    for themselves. Layers should be tongued. Cuttings, two
    or three inches long, of the best roots, made in fall and
    placed in mild bottom heat in early spring, often give fair
    satisfaction. Native plants can be obtained from the woods
    and fields which will give good satisfaction if small specimens
    are taken.

  =Valeriana= (Valerian). _Valerianeæ._

    Seeds and divisions.

  =Vallota.= _Amaryllideæ._

    Bulbels, which usually appear above the surface of the
    pot. Division of the bulbs.

  =Vanda.= _Orchideæ._

    The majority are propagated in the same way as described
    for aërides, but two species--_V. teres_ and _V. Hookeri_--both
    tall and quick growing, may be cut into lengths of a few
    inches. The practice of the most successful cultivators is to
    start them every year as cuttings about a foot long. (See
    also under Orchids.)

  =Vanilla.= _Orchideæ._

    Division and cuttings. The vanilla of commerce (_V. planifolia_)
    is propagated from cuttings which are planted at the
    base of trees, upon which the plant climbs. (See also under
    Orchids)

  =Vegetable Oyster.= See Salsify.

  =Veitchia.= _Palmæ._

    Seeds.

  =Veltheimia.= =Liliaceæ.=

    By fresh seeds or separation of the bulbs.

  =Veratrum= (False or White Hellebore). _Liliaceæ._

    Young plants are obtained by seeds or by divisions.

  =Verbascum= (Mullein). _Scrophularineæ._

    All are raised from seeds sown in any ordinary soil, except
    _V. nigrum_ and _V. pinnatifidum_, which should be increased by
    divisions and cuttings respectively.

  =Verbena= (Vervain). _Verbenaceæ._

    Seeds; also by cuttings of vigorous shoots. Some species
    by divisions.

  =Vernonia=, including Ascaricida (Ironweed). _Compositæ._

    May be raised from seeds, divisions, or cuttings, depending
    on the character of the plant.

  =Veronica= (Speedwell). _Scrophularineæ._

    Seeds and divisions. Shrubby sorts often by cuttings.

  =Vesicaria= (Bladder-pod). _Cruciferæ._

    Annuals by seeds; perennials by division.

  =Vetch= (Vicia sativa). _Leguminosæ._

    By seeds in open air.

  =Viburnum.= _Caprifoliaceæ._

    Seeds, which should be stratified. They usually remain
    dormant the first year. Layers usually make the best plants.
    Green cuttings made in summer and handled in frames give
    excellent results. _V. plicatum_ is propagated by cuttings.
    Ripe cuttings are sometimes used for the soft-wooded species.
    The snowball or guelder-rose (_V. Opulus_) is rapidly increased
    by layers. It is also a good stock for closely related species.
    _V. Lantana_ and _V. dentata_ are good stocks on which varieties
    difficult to handle can be worked by the veneer-graft during
    winter.

  =Victoria= (Royal Water Lily, Water Platter). _Nymphæaceæ._

    The seeds should be kept in vessels of water until ready
    for sowing, when they may be placed in loamy soil, and the
    pot submerged a couple of inches in water, the temperature
    of which should not be allowed to fall below 85°. The
    tank should be in a light position near the glass. Annual.

  =Vinca= (Periwinkle). _Apocynaceæ._

    Increased by seeds and by divisions.

  =Viola= (Violet, Heartsease, Pansy). _Violarieæ._

    The named violets are increased by cuttings made in a
    cool house from vigorous shoots. Common species by seeds,
    runners and divisions of the plants. Pansies are usually
    grown from seeds, but named varieties may be multiplied
    from cuttings taken late in the season, or from layers.

  =Virgilia.= See Cladrastis.

  =Virginia Creeper.= See Ampelopsis.

  =Virgin's Bower.= See Clematis.

  =Viscum= (Mistletoe). _Loranthaceæ._

    Raised from seed, which should be inserted in a notch cut
    in the bark or under side of a branch of the host. Avoid
    crushing the seed, and have the embryo directed towards the
    trunk. To prevent birds from disturbing the seeds after
    being placed in position, cover with light-colored cloth.
    The seed may also be fastened to a smooth part of the tree
    by the sticky substance surrounding it, but more seed is lost.
    Our native phoradendron can be handled in the same way.

  =Vitex= (Chaste-tree). _Verbenaceæ._

    Seeds. Suckers. Layers. Cuttings of green or ripened
    wood.

  =Vitis.= See Grape.

  =Vochysia=, Curcullaria. _Vochysiaceæ._

    Seeds; by ripened cuttings in sand under glass, in heat.


  =Waahoo.= See Euonymus.

  =Waldsteinia.= _Rosaceæ._

    May be multiplied by seeds or divisions.

  =Wall-flower= (_Cheiranthus Cheiri_). _Cruciferæ._

    Propagated by seeds; the plants, however, will not flower
    at the north until the second season; protection of a frame
    is required.

  =Wallichia=, Wrightia. _Palmæ._

    May be increased by seeds; or by suckers, which should
    be gradually separated so as to allow them to make sufficient
    roots before they are quite detached.

  =Walnut.= See Juglans.

  =Water-Cress= (_Nasturtium officinale_). _Cruciferæ._

    Cuttings of the young stems, which root in mud with great
    readiness. Seeds scattered in the water or mud.

  =Water Lily.= See Nymphæa, Nelumbo and Victoria.

  =Water-Melon= (_Citrullus vulgaris_). _Cucurbitaceæ._

    Seeds, usually sown where the plants are to remain, after
    the weather is warm and settled.

  =Watsonia= (Bugle Lily). _Irideæ._

    The plants are multiplied by seeds or by offsets.

  =Wax Flower.= See Hoya.

  =Weigela.= See Diervilla.

  =Wellingtonia.= See Sequoia.

  =Whin.= See Ulex and Genista.

  =White Cedars.= See Chamæcyparis and Thuya.

  =White-wood.= See Liriodendron and Tilia.

  =Whitlava.= See Phacelia.

  =Whortleberry=, Huckleberry (_Gaylussacia resinosa_). _Ericaceæ._

    Propagated by seeds, which should be stratified and otherwise
    carefully handled. (See also Vaccinium.)

  =Willow.= See Salix.

  =Wind Flower.= See Anemone.

  =Windsor, Broad or Horn Bean= (_Vicia Faba._) _Leguminosæ._

    Propagation by seeds in open air after the soil is fairly
    warm.

  =Winter Aconite.= See Eranthis.

  =Winter Cress.= See Barbarea.

  =Wistaria.= _Leguminosæ._

    Readily grown from seeds. Sometimes by division.
    Layers. Cuttings of ripened wood, usually handled under
    glass. The common purple and white kinds are largely
    grown from root-cuttings, an inch or two long, placed in
    bottom heat, when they will start in four or five weeks.
    Many of the fancy kinds, especially when wood is scarce, are
    root- or crown-grafted upon _W. Sinensis._

  =Witch-hazel.= See Hamamelis.

  =Woad-Waxen.= See Genista.

  =Woodbine.= A name properly belonging to climbing Loniceras, but often
  applied to Ampelopsis, both of which see.

  =Wormwood=, Southernwood (_Artemisia Absinthium_). _Compositæ._

    Seeds and division.

  =Wrightia=, Balfouria (Palay or Ivory-tree). _Apocynaceæ._

    Seeds; usually by cuttings, which root readily in sand in
    heat.


  =Xanthoceras=. _Sapindaceæ._

    Usually multiplied by seeds; root-cuttings are sometimes
    used.

  =Xanthorhiza=, Zanthorhiza. _Ranunculaceæ._

    Seeds and suckers.

  =Xanthorrhœa= (Black Boy, Grass-tree). _Juncaceæ._

    Seeds; but usually by offsets.

  =Xanthosoma=, including Acontias. _Aroideæ._

    May be increased by cutting up the stem or root-stock into
    small pieces and planting these in light soil, or cocoa fibre, in
    bottom heat. After a stem has been cut off, a number of
    shoots are developed, which can be treated as cuttings.

  =Xerophyllum.= _Liliaceæ._

    May be propagated by seeds and by divisions.

  =Xiphion.= See Iris.

  =Xylophylla.= See Phyllanthus.


  =Yam.= See Discorea.

  =Yellow-wood.= See Cladrastis.

  =Yew.= See Taxus.

  =Yucca= (Adam's Needle, Bear's Grass, Spanish Bayonet). _Liliaceæ._

    Increased by seeds; and by divisions, which may be
    planted in the open ground, or by pieces of thick, fleshy
    roots, cut into lengths, and inserted in sandy soil, in heat.

  =Yulan.= See Magnolia.


  =Zamia.= _Cycadaceæ._

    Division of the crowns when possible; or by seeds and
    suckers. The plants are oftenest imported directly from
    the tropics.

  =Zanthorhiza.= See Xanthorhiza.

  =Zanthoxylum= (Prickly Ash). _Rutaceæ._

    Seeds, suckers, but more often by root-cuttings.

  =Zea.= See Maize.

  =Zephyranthes=, including Habranthus (Flower of the West Wind, Zephyr
  Flower). _Amaryllideæ._

    May be multiplied by seeds; or by separating the bulbels.

  =Zingiber=, including Zerumbet (Ginger). _Scitamineæ._

    Propagated by division.

  =Zinnia= (Youth-and-old-Age). _Compositæ._

    Seeds, sown either in-doors or out.

  =Zizania= (Wild or Indian Rice). _Graminæ._

    Seeds, sown along water courses or in bogs in fall or
    spring.

  =Zizyphus.= See Jujube.

  =Zygadenus=, including Amianthemum, Anticloa. _Liliaceæ._

    Readily multiplied by seeds or by divisions.

  =Zygopetalum.= _Orchideæ._

    Division. (See also under Orchids.)

  =Zygophyllum= (Bean Caper). _Zygophylleæ,._

    Seeds, when they can be had; otherwise by cuttings in a
    frame.




CHAPTER VII.

POLLINATION


  =Pollination.=--The act of conveying the pollen from the anther to
  the stigma.

  =Close-pollination=--=Self-pollination=.--The transfer of pollen to a
  stigma of the same flower.

  =Cross-pollination.=--The conveyance of pollen to the stigma of
  another flower.

  =Crossing.=--The operation or practice of cross-pollinating.

  =Fertilization=--=Fecundation=--=Impregnation=.--The action of the
  pollen upon the ovules.

  =Close-fertilization=--=Self-fertilization=.--The action of pollen
  upon the ovules of the same flower.

  =Cross-fertilization.=--The action of pollen upon the ovules of
  another flower of the same species.

  =Individual-fertilization.=--Fertilization between flowers upon the
  same plant.

  =Hybridizing.=--The operation or practice of crossing between species.

  =Hybridism=--=Hybridity=.--The state, quality or condition of being a
  hybrid.

  =Hybridization.=--The state or condition of being hybridized, or the
  process or act of hybridizing.

  =Cross.=--An offspring of any two flowers which have been
  cross-fertilized.

  =Individual-Cross.=--An offspring of two flowers on the same plant.

  =Cross-breed=--=Half-breed=--=Mongrel=--=Variety-hybrid=.--A cross
  between varieties of the same species.

  =Hybrid.=--An offspring of plants of different species.

  =Half-hybrid.=--A product of a cross between a species and a variety
  of another species.

  =Derivative or Derivation-hybrid=--=Secondary-hybrid=.--A hybrid
  between hybrids, or between a hybrid and one of its parents.

  =Bigener=--=Bigeneric hybrid=.--A hybrid between species of different
  genera.

  =Bigeneric half-breed.=--A product of a cross between varieties of
  species of different genera.

  =Mule.=--A sterile (seedless) hybrid.

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.--In order to understand the methods of
pollination, the reader must be able to recognize the parts of the
flower. The fuchsia, Fig. 90, shows the parts distinctly. The open
flower, on the right, contains four well-marked series of organs. The
first series is composed of four narrow and leaf-like parts or sepals,
collectively called the calyx. Borne upon these is the corolla, made up
of four blunt and variously colored petals. The next series comprises
eight slender stamens or male organs (_S_). The thread-like portions or
stalks of these are the filaments and upon them are borne the anthers.
The anthers contain the pollen. The last and innermost series is a
pistil or female organ (_P_). The pistil is made up of three parts: the
ovary, which develops into the seed-pod, the style or slender portion,
and the stigma, or enlargement at the end. The ovary in this case is
the oblong body borne at the base of the flower and upon which the
other parts stand. The style runs through the flower to the ovary.

[Illustration: Fig. 90. Parts of the Flower.]

The modifications of the flower are numberless, both in form and number
of parts, but these four series of organs--the calyx, corolla, stamens
and pistils--always comprise a complete flower and they are arranged in
the order named. A perfect flower is one which contains both stamens
and pistils without any reference to the surrounding or leaf-like
organs. Many flowers are imperfect or contain only one sex. When the
sexes are borne in different flowers upon the same plant, the species
is said to be monœcious; and when they are borne upon different plants
the species is diœcious. Sometimes the inflorescence is mixed, some
flowers being perfect, some staminate and some pistillate, all upon
the same plant; such species are polygamous. Most garden plants have
perfect flowers. Many nut-bearing trees are monœcious, as walnuts,
butternut, hickories, chestnuts, hazels and filbert and oaks. Some
of the composite plants are also monœcious, the large head bearing
staminate flowers in one part and pistillate in another. Pumpkins
and squashes are monœcious and so are most varieties of melons. Fig.
91 shows a pistillate pumpkin flower with the ovary or young pumpkin
below, and Fig. 92 a staminate flower which lacks the enlargement
below. Among diœcious species may be mentioned the willows and poplars.

[Illustration: Fig. 91. Pistillate Squash flower.]

The ovary contains the ovules. When these are acted upon or fertilized
by the pollen they develop into seeds. The pollen falls upon the stigma
or upper extremity of the pistil, and each grain germinates and sends
a tube down through the style to an ovule. The stigma is a slightly
roughened soft surface, and when it is "ripe," or ready to receive the
pollen, it becomes slightly moist or sticky. In most plants the stigma
is merely a circular expansion of tissue (Fig. 97), but sometimes it
is divided into lobes and the lobes remain closed until it is ready
for the pollen. The fuchsia stigma is composed of four lobes, which
are closed in Fig. 90. Fig. 93 shows the two-lobed stigma of the
trumpet-creeper or tecoma before the flower is ready for pollination.
Fig. 94 shows the stigma open, in condition to receive the pollen. In
these flowers the stamens are hidden in the tube of the corolla.

[Illustration: Fig. 92. Staminate Squash flower.]

The pollen is nearly always in the form of very small grains, which
become dry when ripe. In some plants, notably in orchids, the pollen is
borne in large masses known as pollinia. When the anther is "ripe" it
assumes a yellow, orange or brownish cast and the pollen is discharged
through a split in the side, a chink at the apex or other aperture.
The pollen may fall upon and fertilize the stigma of the same flower,
in which case the flower is said to be self-fertilized, or oftener
it is carried to another flower by insects, winds or other agencies.
Most plants possess some contrivance which renders self-fertilization
difficult and cross-fertilization easy.

[Illustration: Fig. 93. Closed stigma of tecoma.]

[Illustration: Fig. 94. Open stigma of tecoma.]

There are many degrees of cross-fertilization. The cross may take place
between two flowers in the same cluster or between two clusters upon
the same plant; or it may take place between distinct plants, either
of the same or of another species. Fertilization between flowers on
the same plant is known as individual-fertilization. The limits within
which crossing is possible are not known, but the closer the species
are related the more readily, as a rule, will they cross. One of the
barriers which nature erects to prevent self or close-fertilization
is a difference in time of maturing of the two sexes. In any flower
the two parts are rarely ready at the same time. Flowers in which the
stamens mature first are said to be proterandrous, and those in which
the pistils mature first are proterogynous. In crossing such species,
flowers of different ages can usually be found so that the parts can
be brought together without difficulty. But when one series of organs
in all the flowers of any species perish before the other series is
mature, the pollen must be kept until the pistils are ready, or one sex
must be forced or retarded artificially to accommodate the other. If
the pollen matures first, it is only necessary to keep it a few days
until the pistil is ready; but if the pistil matures first, and the
plants cannot be handled artificially, the pollen must be kept over
until the following season in order to effect any crosses.

The longevity of pollen is little understood. That of some species
will keep much longer than others. It is supposed that, as a rule, it
will not keep beyond a few days or weeks. If the pollen is to be kept,
the anthers should be picked just before ready to burst and laid upon
paper in a warm, dry and shady place until they dry up and the pollen
is all discharged. The anthers must then be removed, and the pollen
is securely wrapped in dry paper. If it is to be kept long it will
probably be better to place it in small, closely cork-stoppered vials.
It should be kept in a uniform temperature.

=Methods.=--All perfect flowers--those which contain both stamens
and pistils--must be deprived of their anthers before the pollen is
discharged, to prevent self-fertilization. This removal of the anthers
is called _emasculation_. It is performed before the flower opens, and
therefore before any foreign pollen could have reached the stigma. In
some flowers, as in the tomato, Fig. 95, the stigma protrudes even
before the petals are fully grown and emasculation must be performed
very early. Even if the stigma is not mature, there is a chance that
pollen will adhere to it and persist until conditions are fit for its
growth.

The flower is generally emasculated by pulling out the anthers with
pincers, but some large anthers can be hooked out easily by a very
small crochet-hook or by a pin bent to a minute hook upon the point.

[Illustration: Fig. 95. Tomato-flower.]

It is many times a tedious operation, however, to pull out the anthers
without crushing them, and thus distribute some of the pollen. A surer
and better plan with most flowers is to cut off the floral envelopes
and the stamens near the base with a pair of small and sharp-pointed
scissors which cut well at the point. _A_ in Fig. 90 shows the point at
which this cut should be made in the fuchsia. With a little practice,
one can cut off the parts quickly. Fig. 96 shows a tomato-flower after
it has been emasculated in this fashion. Fig. 97 represents two flowers
of _Nicotiana affinis_, one of which has been cut. One of the most
important features of this method is the marking of the fruits which
results in all species in which the calyx persists. The calyx, of
course, does not develop and the crossed fruit can be distinguished at
once, even though the label is lost. The tomato fruit in Fig. 98 lacks
entirely the long leaf-like calyx lobes at the base. Fig. 99 shows upon
the right a gooseberry fruit, of which the flower was cut, while that
on the left illustrates an untreated fruit with the long persistent
calyx. This marking of the calyx is useful in all the pomaceous fruits,
like apples and pears, and even in capsular fruits, like phloxes and
petunias, in which the calyx lobes remain green.

[Illustration: Fig. 96. Emasculated tomato-flower.]

[Illustration: Fig. 97. Nicotiana affinis.]

As soon as the flower is emasculated it must be securely tied up with
a bag, to exclude pollen, as seen in Fig. 100. Netting of any kind is
not safe in ordinary practice, for the pollen grains are small enough
to pass through it. It often happens that the flower-stem is not
strong enough to hold the bag, nor large enough to allow the bag to be
puckered tightly about it. In such cases, all the remaining flowers in
the cluster should be removed and the bag should be tied over a portion
of the branch. The branch will often need to be cut off to accommodate
the bag. If there are many large leaves about the flowers, part of them
will need to be cut off. It is always a good practice to emasculate
two or three flowers in the cluster--or all those of the same age--in
order to multiply the chances of success. If flowers of different ages
are emasculated, however, the bag will have to be removed several times
to apply the pollen as the stigmas mature, and the chances of success
will be lessened, for the flowers should be handled as little as
possible.

[Illustration: Fig. 98. Crossed tomato.]

Various bags have been devised and recommended for covering the
flowers, but none of them yet introduced are equal to the ordinary
grocers' manilla bags. The only difficulty is that the smallest
size--the fourth-pound--is too large for many small subjects, but for
these the bag can be cut off. A soft string, five or six inches long,
is passed through one of the folds of the bag about an inch from the
open end, as seen in Fig. 101, and is tied to hold it in place. To make
the bag pucker tightly about the stem, it should be moistened just
before it is used.

In some flowers which have long and thick tube-like corollas, and in
which the stigma matures quickly, the end of the corolla itself may be
tied up. The flowers of squashes and pumpkins are particularly adapted
to this treatment, and one is shown in Fig. 102. The flower is tied
before it opens. In squash-like plants the flowers usually open early
in the morning and the flowers are tied up the preceding evening. The
corollas soon wilt and bags must be used after the pollen is applied;
and even if the corolla does not wilt and shrivel, insects sometimes
eat through it and interfere with the experiment.

All imperfect flowers of course need no emasculation, but they must be
tied up while yet in the bud to protect them from pollen.

[Illustration: Fig. 99. Crossed and uncrossed gooseberries.]

As soon as the stigma matures--which will vary from one to six or seven
days, according to the species--the pollen must be applied. The novice
will be obliged to remove the bags occasionally, to see if the stigmas
are ready. As soon as the shiny or glutinous appearance of the stigma
is seen, pollination should be performed. The pollen is most easily
secured by removing an anther when it is about to burst and breaking it
open. If the anther is allowed to break open naturally, the pollen will
be lost, or at least difficult to secure. There are various instruments
recommended to aid in the transfer of the pollen. A camel's hair brush
is often advised, but it is probably the poorest instrument which can
be used. It wastes the pollen and also mixes it by holding it among the
hairs, and it is often a difficult matter to apply pollen to the stigma
evenly and in sufficient amount. The point of a small knife-blade
is a better instrument. A still handier and better tool is made by
flattening the point of a pin and then inserting the little scalpel in
a handle, as shown in Fig. 103. With the point of this implement the
pollen can be removed from the groove or opening in the side of the
anther. It is commonly better, however, to place the unopened anther
upon the thumb nail and crush it with the scalpel, when the pollen can
be gathered up on the point and transferred to the stigma. In some
species the pollen can be removed only by opening the anther-valves
dexterously. Such is the case with the tomato; the point of the scalpel
is inserted in a longitudinal groove or fold in the side of the anther,
and as it is carried upwards the pollen is secured.

[Illustration: Fig. 100. Flower tied up.]

The stigma should receive an abundant supply of pollen. No harm can
come from supplying too much while if too little is applied, some
of the seeds will not mature or even the fruit may not set. It is
well known that in many plants, at least, the pollen stimulates the
development of the fruit-walls, as well as fertilizes the ovules, and
a greater amount of pollen than is sufficient to produce the seeds
themselves may therefore exert an important influence. Sometimes it
is not necessary to use an instrument to transfer the pollen. If the
pollen is copious and adheres to the anther after it is discharged, the
anther may be simply rubbed over the stigma. An anther will ordinarily
contain sufficient pollen to fertilize several stigmas. The whole
surface of the stigma should be covered until it is colored with the
pollen. Sometimes it will be found advisable to cut off the corolla
from large flowers, if it was not done when the flower was emasculated,
to facilitate the labor of applying pollen. The short stigmas of
squashes, for instance, can be reached more easily if the corolla is
removed, as in Fig. 104.

[Illustration: Fig. 101. Bag.]

In order to prevent the mixing of pollen, the flowers from which it
is to be derived should be covered while in the bud, the same as the
flowers designed as the pistillate parents. Otherwise foreign pollen
may be deposited upon the anthers by insects or winds.

[Illustration: Fig. 102. Squash flower tied up.]

As soon as the pollen is applied to the stigma, the flower should be
tied up again the same as before. The bag should remain three or four
days or a week, until the stigma has died and all danger of another
pollination is removed. If the fruit is likely to be destroyed by
birds or insects, it should be covered with netting bags as soon as
the paper-bags are removed. These bags also serve to mark the crossed
fruits, and to catch them if they should drop before the operator is
aware. Of course all crosses should be labelled with the names of both
parents and the date of the operation.

[Illustration: Fig. 103. Pin-scalpel.]

For ordinary operations, no especial outfit is necessary for the
crossing of plants, but those who experiment largely will find that the
work will be greatly facilitated by the use of a portable box in which
the various requisites can be carried. If this box has a compartment
for every article, the operator will see at a glance if anything is
lacking before he goes to the field. Figs. 105 and 106 illustrate a
convenient pollinating kit. This is made about 12 inches long, 9 inches
wide and 3 inches deep. In the central portion is a compartment for
bags and one for labels. At the right end, running crosswise, is a
narrow compartment for string, and at its upper end is a small bottle
of alcohol. Into this alcohol the scalpel and other tools are dipped
whenever another kind of pollen is to be used, in order to destroy
whatever pollen grains may adhere to them. In front is a compartment
for a magnifying glass, and a long one to hold scalpel, brushes,
crochet-hook and pencil. The note-book is held in the cover by a wire
clasp.

[Illustration: Fig. 104. Treated squash flower.]

It is rare that all the flowers which one pollinates will mature
fruit. If one-half are successful on the average, the operator may be
satisfied. External conditions have much to do with the success of the
operation. Some species do not set well during very dry weather and
some are impatient of confinement. But probably all plants which thrive
under glass are more sure to give good results if pollinated under
confinement, because conditions are under control.

=Crossing of Flowerless Plants.=--Ferns, lycopodiums, and their allies,
pass through two stages of development, and fertilization takes place
only in the first stage. When spores germinate, a small, thin, green
tissue spreads over the soil. This tissue is the prothallus (or
prothallium). Upon the prothallus, or somewhat sunken in it, the sexual
organs appear. They are minute aggregations of cells. Some of these
aggregations develop into sperm or male organs and some into germ or
female organs. The sperm organ is known as an antheridium and the germ
organ as an archegonium. Spermatozoids are formed in the antheridium,
and these enter the archegonium and fertilize the germ cell. This
fertilized germ cell then develops into the second stage of the
species, or into that part which we know as the fern or the lycopod.
During this second stage, the plant bears leaf-like organs and it also
produces numerous spores. These spores will produce the prothallus
again when sown. Ferns, therefore, are fertilized but once during their
lifetime, and the spores are not the direct result of fertilization as
are the seeds of flowering plants.

[Illustration: Fig. 105. Pollinating Kit, closed.]

If ferns and other flowerless plants are to be crossed, therefore,
the operation must be performed in the prothallic stage. It was long
a matter of doubt among botanists as to whether crossing is possible
among these plants, but it is now known that it does occur. It has
been brought about repeatedly in cultivation. The sperm bodies are
not transferred by hand, but the spores of the species between which
crosses are desired are sown together and the transfer is allowed
to take place naturally. The prothallia of ferns are nearly always
diœcious (sexes borne on different plants), so that crossing in such
cases is not improbable. Many spores should be sown to increase
the chances of success, and care should be taken that the different
kinds germinate simultaneously. Some species germinate quicker than
others, and the operator must determine by previous trial what these
differences are. (For methods of sowing spores, see page 24.) Only a
small part of the plants will be likely to be crosses. In one of Lowe's
experiments, only five plants out of 1,000 were undoubted crosses.

[Illustration: Fig. 106. Pollinating Kit, open.]




ORDINAL INDEX.

An Index to the natural orders or families mentioned in the Nursery
List. A number in parentheses indicates the number of references to the
family upon a page, if more than one occurs.

  Acanthaceæ, 99, 115, 125 (2), 130, 133, 149, 158, 170, 183, 188, 198,
     210, 216, 264, 273, 277 (2)
  Alangieæ, 106
  Alismaceæ, 101, 107, 144, 217
  Amarantaceæ, 108, 109, 156, 207
  Amaryllideæ, 105, 108, 109, 138, 140, 142, 147, 148, 164, 169, 171,
     173, 179, 185 (2), 190, 192, 199, 203, 206 (2), 207, 208, 215,
     229, 231, 240, 247, 254, 280, 285
  Ampelideæ (Vitaceæ), 110, 162, 195
  Anacardiaceæ, 111, 166, 180, 222, 251, 262, 266, 271
  Anonaceæ, 113, 122, 123
  Apocynaceæ, 102, 104, 107, 108, 110, 115, 132, 152, 153, 178, 222,
     231, 254, 275, 278, 282, 284
  Araliaceæ, 120, 172, 192, 201, 238, 240, 267
  Aristolochiaceæ, 121, 123
  Aroideæ, Araceæ, 100, 107, 109, 110, 111, 114, 121, 123, 146, 199,
     226, 238, 240, 248, 261, 262, 266 (2), 270, 272, 275, 281
  Asclepiadeæ, 111, 123, 124, 140, 149, 157, 194, 199, 205, 223, 246,
     249, 271, 272


  Begoniaceæ, 132
  Berberideæ, 106, 130, 134, 155, 182, 203, 209, 213, 215, 254
  Bignoniaceæ, 102, 110 (2), 135, 154, 160, 180, 208, 276
  Bixineæ, 128, 136, 206
  Boragineæ, 111, 122, 138, 167, 172, 181 (2), 201, 218, 225, 228, 234
     (2), 275
  Bromeliaceæ, 99, 135, 141, 180, 250, 278
  Bruniaceæ, 126, 134, 142
  Burseraceæ, 110, 129, 139, 144


  Cacteæ, 145, 183, 234, 245, 246, 248, 261
  Calycanthaceæ, 149, 160
  Campanulaceæ, 102, 151 (3), 156, 172 (2), 179, 209, 216, 218, 225,
     249, 251, 259, 278
  Canellaceæ, 151
  Capparideæ, 152, 161, 254
  Caprifoliaceæ, 97, 177, 216, 217, 219, 265, 275, 281
  Caryophylleæ, 105, 121, 153, 157, 199, 220, 250, 255, 265, 269, 275
  Casuarineæ, 154
  Celastrineæ, 154, 155, 185, 228
  Chenopodiaceæ, 132, 139, 235, 271
  Cinchonaceæ, 107
  Cistineæ, 163, 201
  Combretaceæ, 162 (2), 259, 276
  Commelinaceæ, 112, 166, 172, 177, 278
  Compositæ, 99, 101 (2), 105 (2), 106, 108, 109, 112, 114 (2), 115,
     120 (2), 121, 122 (4), 124 (2), 126 (2), 128 (3), 130, 132, 133 (3),
     134, (2), 135 (2), 138 (2), 140 (2), 143, 147, 148 (2), 149, 152
     (2), 153, 154, 155, 156, 160, 161 (2), 162 (3), 167, 168, 171,
     173, 174, 177, 179, 180 (2), 181, 182, 183, 185, 186, 190, 191,
     198, 199, 201 (3), 202, 205, 207, 210, 214, 215 (3), 216 (3), 220,
     222, 228, 233, 238, 239, 241, 261, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268,
     269, 270, 272 (2), 275, 276, 281, 284, 285
  Coniferæ, 97, 120, 126, 148, 155, 158, 170, 171 (2), 173, 188, 192,
     210, 213, 249 (2), 250, 254, 257, 260, 267, 268, 276 (2), 277, 278
  Convolvulaceæ, 121, 167, 207, 232, 274
  Coriarieæ
  Cornaceæ, 126, 134, 167, 191, 232
  Crassulaceæ, 142, 169 (2), 195, 211, 267, 268
  Cruciferæ, 104, 109, 111, 120, 126, 130, 136, 138, 145, 146, 152, 169
     (2), 176, 179, 184, 202, 204, 206, 211, 212, 220, 221, 223, 226,
     241, 245, 259, 262, 267, 279, 281, 283 (2)
  Cucurbitaceæ, 97, 142, 171, 195, 220, 224 (2), 226, 257, 267, 271,
     278, 283
  Cunoniaceæ, 101
  Cupuliferæ, 107, 135, 153, 160, 168, 186, 238, 258
  Cycadaceæ, 157, 172, 178, 182, 285
  Cyperaceæ, 152, 172, 240
  Cyrilleæ, 173
  Cytinaceæ


  Datisceæ, 175
  Diapensiaceæ, 190
  Dilleniaceæ, 151, 177, 202
  Dioscoreaceæ, 178, 276
  Dipsaceæ, 266
  Dipterocarpeæ
  Droseraceæ, 178, 180 (2)


  Ebenaceæ, 178, 246
  Elæagnaceæ, 181, 203, 268
  Empetraceæ, 157, 167, 182
  Epacrideæ, 101, 111, 125, 182, 224
  Ericaceæ, 112, 120, 127, 132, 148, 154, 164, 169, 181, 182 (2), 183,
     191, 211, 214 (2), 215, 219, 220, 225, 239, 257, 261, 283
  Euphorbiaceæ, 98, 106, 145, 154, 162, 165, 185, 202, 203, 209, 222,
     248, 254, 262, 272


  Ficoideæ, 225
  Filices, 175, 177, 187, 220, 238, 251, 255, 257
  Frankeniaceæ, 189
  Fumarieæ. See Papaveraceæ.


  Gentianeæ, 161, 184, 186, 191, 214, 218, 225, 264, 275
  Geraniaceæ, 127, 128, 129, 135, 184, 191, 207, 217, 226, 238, 244, 279
  Gesneraceæ, 99, 103, 104, 128, 134, 177, 192, 193, 211, 212, 216,
     229, 230, 259, 273
  Gnetaceæ, 182
  Goodenovieæ, 142, 174, 194, 215, 266
  Gramineæ, 105, 112, 123 (2), 129, 141 (2), 146, 185, 199, 221, 247,
     270, 274, 285
  Guttiferæ, 149, 164, 190, 221


  Hæmodoraceæ, 113, 200, 245, 265
  Halorageæ, 199
  Hamamelideæ, 143, 189, 200, 218
  Hydrophyllaceæ, 230, 246
  Hypericineæ, 123, 206


  Ilicineæ, 206, 230
  Irideæ, 113, 114, 121, 128, 137, 162, 170 (2), 172, 188, 189, 192,
     202, 208 (2), 223, 230, 241, 262, 267, 269, 270, 277, 279, 283


  Juglandeæ, 203, 209, 244, 257
  Juncaceæ, 147, 210, 284


  Labiatæ, 103, 106, 113 (2), 129, 131, 137, 146, 155 (2), 165, 166,
     180, 183, 204, 206, 214, 215, 219, 224, 226, 231, 245 (2), 246,
     248, 256, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 270, 271, 276, 277
  Laurineæ, 134, 151, 214, 246, 265
  Leguminosæ, 98 (2), 102 (2), 103, 104, 105, 106, 109 (3), 110 (2),
     111, 114, 115 (2), 120, 123, 125, 130 (4), 131, 132, 139 (2), 140,
     141, 142 (2), 144, 146 (2), 147, 149, 150, 152 (2), 153, 154, 157
     (3), 163, 164 (2), 166, 167, 170, 173, 174, 175, 176, 179 (2),
     181, 184 (2), 186, 190 (2), 193 (2), 194 (2), 199, 200 (3), 201,
     204, 207 (2), 211, 212, 213, 215 (2), 218, 219 (2), 220, 223, 225,
     226, 229, 234, 238, 239 (2), 241 (2), 243, 246, 247, 251, 254 (2),
     256, 257, 262 (2), 268, 270, 274, 276, 277, 280, 281, 283, 284
  Lentibularieæ, 250
  Liliaceæ, 104, 106, 107, 108, 112 (2), 114, 115, 122, 124 (4), 132,
     133, 134, 137, 140, 141, 143 (2), 144, 148 (2), 150, 161 (2), 164,
     165, 166, 174, 175, 176, 178, 179 (2), 183, 184, 185, 190 (3),
     191, 192, 193, 202 (2), 205, 211, 212 (2), 213, 214 (2), 216, 218,
     223, 225, 227, 229, 234, 238, 241, 248, 255, 257, 262, 264, 266,
     267, 268, 269 (2), 274, 279 (4), 280, 281 (2), 284, 285 (2)
  Lineæ, 184, 217, 260
  Loaseæ, 131, 137, 218
  Loganiaceæ, 176, 191, 219
  Loranthaceæ, 282
  Lycopodiaceæ, 268
  Lythrarieæ, 171, 212, 214, 220, 231, 255


  Magnoliaceæ, 180, 206, 210, 218, 221, 225, 266
  Malpighiaceæ, 101, 129, 143, 145, 221, 272
  Malvaceæ, 98, 108, 138, 148, 168, 183, 189, 203 (2), 211, 212, 213,
     221 (3), 226, 233, 239, 241, 271
  Melastomaceæ, 100, 122, 134, 137, 141, 150, 156, 157, 172, 202, 213,
     224 (2), 252, 270
  Meliaceæ, 105, 106, 152, 155, 224, 265, 278
  Menispermaceæ, 98, 162, 165, 224
  Monimiaceæ, 126
  Moringeæ, 226
  Myoporineæ, 228
  Myricaceæ, 166, 228
  Myristiceæ, 229
  Myrsineæ, 120, 163, 209
  Myrtaceæ, 100, 113, 124, 128 (3), 131, 132, 148, 149, 150 (2), 152,
     153, 174, 185, 199 (2), 224, 225, 229 (2)


  Naiadaceæ, 115, 238
  Nepenthaceæ, 230
  Nolanaceæ, 108
  Nyctagineæ, 97, 139, 226
  Nymphæaceæ, 145, 230, 232, 282


  Ochnaceæ, 194, 232
  Olacineæ, 233
  Oleaceæ, 161, 189 (3), 209, 216, 232 (2), 233 (2), 238, 248, 275
  Onagrarieæ, 162, 163, 182, 190, 191, 210, 219, 233, 278
  Orchideæ, 98, 99, 102, 103, 104, 113 (2), 114, 115, 130, 131, 137,
     140, 141, 143, 144, 146, 149, 150, 155, 166, 173, 175, 178, 182,
     212, 220, 223 (2), 225, 232, 234, 236, 247 (2), 265, 271, 277,
     278, 280, 281, 285


  Palmæ, 99 (2), 101, 121, 125, 128, 138, 140, 146, 154, 158, 165, 174,
     178, 181, 186, 191, 207, 209, 211, 216, 218, 222, 223, 233, 234,
     240, 248, 249, 251, 256, 257, 259, 264, 277, 278, 281, 283
  Pandaneæ, 190, 240
  Papaveraceæ, 103, 121, 137, 168, 176, 182, 184, 190, 223, 240, 262,
     265
  Passifloreæ, 152, 195, 241
  Pedalineæ, 223, 268
  Phytolaccaceæ, 249, 262
  Piperaceæ, 245, 251
  Pittosporeæ, 135, 144, 251
  Plantagineæ, 98, 251
  Platanaceæ, 251
  Plumbagineæ, 121, 254, 272
  Polemoniaceæ, 151, 164, 192, 219, 248, 254
  Polygaleæ, 166, 212, 255
  Polygonaceæ, 143, 148, 165, 183, 227, 255, 261, 270
  Pontederiaceæ, 181, 255
  Portulacaceæ, 106, 110, 146, 216
  Primulaceæ, 111, 112, 127, 168, 172, 179, 204, 220, 256, 270
  Proteaceæ, 102, 104, 127, 129, 198, 200, 211, 213, 215, 219, 246, 256


  Ranunculaceæ, 100, 101, 103, 112 (2), 120, 126, 149, 162, 163, 167,
     175, 183, 202 (2), 208, 212, 231, 239, 259, 276, 279, 284
  Resedaceæ, 260
  Rhamneæ, 134, 155, 166, 205, 210, 240, 248, 260
  Rosaceæ, 98, 102, 105, 106, 107, 109, 116, 119, 136, 144, 158 (2),
     161, 168, 169, 176, 185, 186, 192 (2), 210, 211, 217, 224, 232,
     242, 243, 248, 252, 255, 256 (2), 257, 258, 259 (2), 261, 263 (2),
     271, 272, 283
  Rubiaceæ, 103, 114, 124, 139 (2), 144, 149, 151, 155, 156 (2), 160,
     162, 165 (2), 167, 170, 191, 200 (2), 203, 204, 208, 219, 222,
     230, 231, 240, 245, 250, 263
  Rutaceæ, 100 (2), 101, 102, 103, 105, 107, 125, 131, 134, 135, 139,
     149, 154, 161, 163 (2), 168, 170, 177, 178, 184, 193, 214, 217,
     235, 247 (2), 255, 257, 264, 269, 285


  Salicineæ, 255, 264
  Sapindaceæ, 99, 104, 212, 224 (2), 230, 231, 271, 284
  Sapotaceæ, 121, 131, 162, 208, 265
  Sarraceniaceæ, 174, 265
  Saxifrageæ, 102, 114, 125, 131, 141, 147, 148, 157, 162, 171, 175,
     176, 184, 189, 194, 202, 206, 208, 241, 247, 262, 266, 267, 277
  Scitamineæ (Zingiberaceæ), 108, 129, 147, 151, 168, 171, 201 (2), 222
     (2), 227, 273, 285
  Scrophularineæ, 108, 111, 112, 115, 122, 138, 142 (2), 147, 156, 157,
     158, 177, 183, 192, 198, 208, 217, 223, 225, 241, 245, 261, 264,
     265, 278, 281 (2)
  Selagineæ, 193
  Simarubeæ, 142, 258
  Solanaceæ 114, 126, 157, 173, 175, 181, 186, 208, 213, 220, 222, 231
     (3), 245, 246, 249 (2), 255, 266, 269 (2), 278
  Sterculiaceæ, 97, 124, 125, 140, 211, 213, 221, 229, 245, 264, 272,
     277
  Stylidieæ, 273
  Styraceæ, 200, 274, 275


  Taccaceæ, 275
  Tamariscineæ, 276
  Ternstrœmiaceæ, 101, 138, 150, 153, 185, 195, 273, 276
  Thymelæaceæ, 174, 178, 181, 212 (2), 247, 249, 273
  Tiliaceæ, 99, 114, 115, 121, 142, 181, 182, 198, 270, 277
  Turneraceæ, 279
  Typhaceæ, 280


  Umbelliferæ, 100, 101, 112, 113, 122, 125, 126, 144, 156, 160, 167,
     170, 177, 184, 186, 202, 219, 229, 241 (2), 269
  Urticaceæ, 123, 138, 141 (2), 151, 155, 156, 179, 188 (2), 205, 213,
     220, 226, 249, 251, 280


  Vacciniaceæ, 104, 280
  Valerianeæ, 156, 280
  Verbenaceæ, 103, 108, 139, 147, 153, 161, 164, 213, 217, 256, 281, 282
  Violarieæ, 108, 111, 168, 184, 207, 282
  Vitaceæ. See Ampelideæ
  Vochysiaceæ, 282


  Zanthoxyleæ, 105
  Zingiberaceæ. See Scitamineæ
  Zygophylleæ, 198, 285




GENERAL INDEX.


                                             Page.

  Annular budding,                              75


  Bark-grafting,                                88
  Bass,                                         72
  Bell glass,                                   39
  Bigeneric half-breed,                        286
  Bigener, definition of,                      286
  Bigeneric hybrid, definition of,             286
  Budding,                                      67
  Budding, kinds of,                            66
  Bulbel, definition of,                        26
  Bulblet, definition of,                       29
  Bulb-scales,                                  28
  Bulbs, definition of,                         25


  Callus,                                       49
  Cions, cutting,                               77
  Cion, definition of,                          63
  Cleft-grafting,                               81
  Cloche,                                       39
  Close-fertilization, definition of,          286
  Close-pollination, definition of,            286
  Corm, definition of,                          29
  Cormel, definition of,                        30
  Cross-breed, definition of,                  286
  Cross, definition of,                        286
  Cross-fertilization, definition of,          286
  Crossing, definition of,                     286
  Cross-pollination, definition of,            286
  Crown, definition of,                         31
  Crown-grafting,                               76
  Cuttage, definition of,                       39
  Cutting, definition of,                       39
  Cutting-grafting,                             91


  Damping-off,                              22, 27
  Derivative-hybrid, definition of,            286
  Division,                                     51
  Double-grafting,                              91
  Dressing of stocks,                           69


  Emasculation,                                291


  Fecundation, definition of,                  286
  Fertilization, definition of,                286
  Flowerless plants, crossing of,              297
  Flowers, diœcious,                           288
    --  monœcious,                             288
    --  perfect,                               287
    --  proterandrous,                         290
    --  proterogynous,                         290
  Flute-budding,                                75
  Free stock,                                   63
  Fruit-grafting,                               90


  Graftage, definition of,                      63
  Grafting,                                     76
  Grafting, definition of,                      63
  Grafting, kinds of,                           66
  Grafting-waxes,                               92
  Green-wood cuttings,                          56


  Half-breed, definition of,                   286
  Half-hybrid, definition of,                  286
  Hard-wood cuttings,                           54
  Heel cuttings,                                48
  Herbaceous-grafting,                          89
  Hybrid, definition of,                       286
  Hybridism, definition of,                    286
  Hybridity, definition of,                    286
  Hybridization, definition of,                286
  Hybridizing, definition of,                  286


  Impregnation, definition of,                 286
  Inarching,                                    92
  Individual-cross, definition of,             286
  Individual-fertilization, definition of,     286


  June budding,                                 73


  Knaurs,                                       56
  Knives, budding,                              69
  Knives, grafting,                             84


  Layer, definition of,                         32
  Layerage, definition of,                      32
  Layering, Chinese,                            36
    --  circumposition,                         36
    --  mound,                                  35
    --  stool,                                  35
    --  pot,                                    36
    --  serpentine,                             34
  Leaf cuttings,                                60


  Mallet cuttings,                              48
  Mallet, for grafting,                         87
  Mongrel, definition of,                      286
  Mule, definition of,                         286


  Offset, definition of,                        30


  Plastic, for grafting,                        92
  Pollination, definition of,                  286
  Propagating frame,                            39
  Prothallus,                                  297


  Raffia,                                       72
  Regermination,                                22
  Ring-budding,                                 75
  Root-cuttings,                                53
  Root-grafting,                            76, 77
  Root-tip,                                     33


  Saddle-grafting,                              79
  Scales of bulbs,                              28
  Scions, cutting,                              77
  Scion, definition of,                         63
  Screens, for seeds and cuttings,              12
  Seedage, definition of,                        9
  Seed-grafting,                                90
  Seeds, boring,                                18
    --  depth for sowing,                       20
    --  freezing,                               17
    --  Influence of light upon,                21
    --  soaking,                                17
    --  sowing,                                 19
    --  Transportation of,                      23
  Self-fertilization, definition of,           286
  Self-pollination, definition of,             286
  Separation, definition of,                    25
  Shield-budding,                               68
  Side-grafting,                                80
  Splice-grafting,                              80
  Spores, sowing,                               24
  Stem cuttings,                                54
  Stem-grafting,                                76
  Stick, of buds,                               69
  Stock, definition of,                         63
  Stolon, definition of,                        32
  Stratification,                               15
  String for tying,                             71


  Tongue-grafting,                              76
  Top-grafting,                             76, 84
  Tuber cuttings,                               52
  Tuber, definition of,                         30
  Tubular bedding,                              76
  Tying buds,                                   71


  Variety-hybrid, definition of,               286
  Veneer-budding,                               75
  Veneer-grafting,                              80


  Wax for grafting,                             92
  Whip-grafting,                                76
  Whistle-budding,                              76


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber Note


Where two different spellings of plant names appear, either the most
used or the contemporary spelling was employed. All paragraphs split by
images were rejoined and the images moved above or below the paragraph.


Definitions Missing

The Ordinal Index lists "Coriarieæ" without a page reference and it does
NOT occur in the book's text.

Below is a list of referenced entries in the Ordinal Index for which the
targets are missing from the text:

    Castilleja
    Odontospermum
    Patrinia
    Tsuga







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Nursery Book, by Liberty Hyde Bailey

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NURSERY BOOK ***

***** This file should be named 47955-0.txt or 47955-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/9/5/47955/

Produced by Tom Cosmas, Cathy Maxam and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

