The Project Gutenberg EBook of The True Life Story of Swiftwater Bill Gates, by 
Iola Beebe

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The True Life Story of Swiftwater Bill Gates

Author: Iola Beebe

Release Date: January 15, 2015 [EBook #47979]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRUE LIFE STORY--SWIFTWATER BILL GATES ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









[Illustration: DECORATED TITLE PAGE - PORTRAIT


  _The True_
  _Life Story of_
  _Swiftwater Bill Gates_

  _By His_
  _Mother-in-Law,_
  _Mrs. Iola Beebe._
]




                 Copyrighted 1908, by Mrs. Iola Beebe.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.--Swiftwater First Hears of the Golden Find on Bonanza, in
  the Klondike.

CHAPTER II.--Lure of Great Wealth and Love of Gussie Lamore Starts
  Swiftwater on His Career--True Story of Famous Egg Episode in Dawson.

CHAPTER III.--Swiftwater Buys Gussie’s Love by Giving Her Virgin
  Gold to the Exact Amount of Her Weight--Fickle Girl Jilts Him in
  San Francisco and He Marries Her Sister, Grace--Burglarizes His Own
  Residence After Quarrel With Bride.

CHAPTER IV.--Our Hero, Now a Big Operator and Promoter, Meets His
  Future Mother-in-Law in Seattle for the First Time.

CHAPTER V.--Love on First Sight of Bera Beebe Is Followed by an
  Elopement, Which Ends Haplessly on the Hurricane Deck of the Steamer
  in Seattle Harbor.

CHAPTER VI.--Swiftwater Again Elopes With Bera, and They Are Married
  in the Yukon.

CHAPTER VII.--First Born of Swiftwater and Bera Sees Light of Day on
  Quartz Creek, Where First Gold Was Found in the Klondike--Financial
  Entanglements Drive Swiftwater to Abandon Immensely Rich Property.

CHAPTER VIII.--Swiftwater Deserts His Child and Authoress in Dawson
  and Skips for the Nome Country.

CHAPTER IX.--Hard Lines for a Deserted Woman in Dawson--Driven From
  Shelter by Phil Wilson, Swiftwater’s Friend--Mounted Police Are Kind
  to Deserving Unfortunate.

CHAPTER X.--Swiftwater Elopes With Kitty Brandon, His Fifteen-Year-Old
  Niece, After Deserting Bera in Washington, D. C.--Is Pursued by
  Kitty’s Mother, but Escapes at Night from Seattle.

CHAPTER XI.--One Woman’s Ingratitude to Another, Who Had Befriended
  Her--Bera Is Sent Home Penniless--The Return to Seattle.

CHAPTER XII.--Swiftwater Returns, a Broken Man, to Seattle--Hides
  Under the Bed Clothes at His Hotel in Terror When Discovered by His
  Mother-in-Law--My Gems Are Pledged to Raise Money to Get Him a New
  Start in Alaska.

CHAPTER XIII.--Swiftwater Gives Business Men Swell Banquet on Borrowed
  Money and Then Decamps for the Tanana Country--A Spring Rush to the
  New Gold Fields Brings Picturesque Crowd to Seattle.

CHAPTER XIV.--Swiftwater Strikes It Rich on No. 6 Cleary Creek--Trip
  to the Interior Over the Ice--Swiftwater Promises to Make Reparation.

CHAPTER XV.--We Come Out Together From the Tanana--Bera Has Swiftwater
  Arrested on Landing in Seattle for Wife Desertion.

CHAPTER XVI.--How Swiftwater Secures His First Great Miscarriage of
  Justice--Remarkable Legal Transaction in a Seattle Hotel, Involving
  Court and Lawyers--Bill Persuades Bera to Secure a Divorce.

CHAPTER XVII.--Swiftwater, Again in His Familiar Role as the Artful
  Dodger--I Take Another Trip Over the Ice to the Yukon--Gates Makes
  More Fair Promises and Then Runs Away to the States.

CHAPTER XVIII.--Laws of Our Country Have Large Loopholes for Criminals
  of Wealth--Swiftwater Travels Scot Free and Makes Another Fortune in
  the New Mining Camp of Rawhide, Nevada.

CHAPTER XIX.--Nurse Abducts Clifford, Swiftwater’s Eldest Son, and
  Takes Him to Canada--Miner Fails to Make Any Effort to Recapture
  Child--Waiting to Get What Is My Own Out of the Northland--The End.




PREFACE.


IT may seem odd to Alaskans, and by that I mean, the men and women
who really live in the remote, yet near, northern gold country,
that “Swiftwater Bill”--known to both the old Sour Doughs and the
Cheechacos--should have asked me to write the real story of his life,
yet this is really the fact.

Bill Gates is in some ways, and indeed in many, one of the most
remarkable men that the lust for gold ever produced in any clime or
latitude.

Remarkable?

Yes--that’s the word--and possibly nothing more remarkable than that
he, in a confiding moment said to me as he held his first born child in
his arms in the little cabin on Quartz Creek, in the Klondike, where he
had amassed and spent a fortune of $500,000:

“I’d like somebody to write my life story. Will you do it?”

I can only believe that the romantic element in Swift Water
Bill’s character--a character as changeful and variegated as the
kaleidoscope--led Swiftwater Bill to ask me to do him this service.
I was then the mother of his wife--the grandmother of his child. The
sacredness of the relation must be apparent.

Probably a great many people--hundreds, perhaps--may say that my labor
is one that can have no reward, and these may speak ill things of
Swiftwater, saying, perhaps, that he is more inclined to do royally by
strangers and to forget those who have aided and befriended him.

I am not to judge Swiftwater Bill, nor do I wish him to be judged
except as the individual reader of this little work may wish so to do.

If he has turned against those near and dear to him--if he has
preferred to give prodigally of gold to strangers, while at the same
time forgetting his own obligations--I am not the one to point the
finger of rebuke at his eccentricities.

For this reason, the narrative within these covers is confined to the
facts relating to the career of Swiftwater Bill--a character worthy
of the pen of a Dickens or a Dumas--with his faults and his virtues
impartially portrayed as best I can do.

  IOLA BEEBE,

  Mother-in-law of Swiftwater Bill.

[Illustration: MRS. IOLA BEEBE, Mother-in-law of Swiftwater Bill.]




CHAPTER I.


A LITTLE, low-eaved, common, ordinary looking road house, built of
logs, with one room for the bunks, another for a kitchen and a third
for miscellaneous purposes, used to be well known to travelers in the
Yukon Valley in Alaska at Circle City. The straggling little mining
camp, its population divided between American, French-Canadians of
uncertain pedigree, and Indians with an occasional admixture of canny
Scotchmen, whose conversation savored strongly of the old Hudson Bay
Trading Company’s days in the far north, enjoyed no reputation outside
of Forty Mile, Juneau and the Puget Sound cities of Seattle and Tacoma.
From the wharves of these cities in 1895 there left at infrequent
intervals, small chuggy, wobbly steamers for Southeastern Alaska points
usually carrying in the spring months motley cargoes of yelping dogs,
rough coated, bearded, tanned miners and prospectors from all points of
the globe, and great quantities of canned goods of every description.

In those days the eager and hardy prospector who fared forth to the
Yukon’s dangers in search of gold was usually indifferent to whatever
fate befell him. He figured that at best the odds were overwhelmingly
against him, with just one chance, or maybe ten, in a hundred of
striking a pay streak. It was inevitable that a great proportion of
the venturous and ignorant Chechacos, or newcomers, who paid their
dollars by the hundred to the steamship companies in Seattle, should,
after failing in the search for gold, seek means of gaining a miserable
existence in some wage paid vocation.

Were it in my power to bring my hero on the stage under more
auspicious circumstances than those of which I am about to tell, I
would gladly do it. But the truth must be told of Swiftwater Bill,
and at the time of the opening of my narrative--and this was before
the world had ever heard the least hint of the wonderful Klondike
gold discovery--Swiftwater stood washing dishes in the kitchen of the
road-house I have just described.

The place was no different from any one of a thousand of these little
log shelters where men, traveling back and forth in the dead of winter
with dog teams, find temporary lodging and a hurried meal of bacon
and beans and canned stuff. It was broad daylight, although the clock
showed eleven P. M., in August, 1896. The sun scarcely seemed to linger
more than an hour beneath the horizon at nightfall, to re-appear a
shimmering ball of light at three o’clock in the morning.

“Bring us another pot of coffee!” shouted one of three prospectors,
who sat with their elbows on the table, greedily licking up the
remnants of a huge platter full of bacon and beans garnished with some
strips of cold, canned roast beef and some evaporated potatoes, which
had been made into a kind of stew.

The hero of my sketch wiped his hands on a greasy towel and, taking a
dirty, black tin coffee pot from the top of the Yukon stove, he hurried
in to serve his customers.

One of these was six feet two, broad shouldered, sparsely built,
hatchet faced, with a long nose, keen blue eyes and with auburn
colored hair falling almost to his shoulders. French Joe was the
name he went by, and no more intrepid trapper and prospector ever
lived in the frozen valley of the Yukon than he. The other two were
nondescripts--one with a coarse yellow jumper, the other in a dark blue
suit of cast off army clothes. The man in the jumper was bearded, short
and chunky, of German extraction, while the other was a half-blood
Indian.

Swiftwater, as he ambled into the room, one hand holding his dirty
apron, the other holding the coffee pot, was not such a man as to
excite the interest of even a wayfarer in the road-house at Circle.
About 35 years old, five feet five inches tall, a scraggly growth of
black whiskers on his chin, and long, wavy moustaches of the same
color, curling from his upper lip, Swiftwater did not arouse even a
passing glance from the trio at the table.

[Illustration: SWIFTWATER HEARS FROM FRENCH JOE THE FIRST NEWS OF THE
GOLD DISCOVERY IN THE KLONDIKE.]

“Boys, de’ done struck it, al’ right, ’cause Indian George say it’s all
gold from ze gras’ roots, on Bonanza. An’ it’s only a leetle more’n two
days polin’ up ze river from ze T’hoandike.”

It was French Joe who spoke, and then when he drew forth a little
bottle containing a few ounces of gold nuggets and dust, Swiftwater
Bill, as he poured the third cup of coffee, gazed open mouthed on the
showing of yellow treasure.

It is only necessary to say that from that moment Swiftwater was
attentive to the needs of his three guests, and when he had overheard
all of their talk he silently, but none the less positively, made up
his mind to quit his job forthwith and to “mush” for the new gold
fields.

And this is why it was that, the next morning, the little Circle City
road-house was minus a dishwasher and all round handyman. And before
the little community was well astir, far in the distance, up the
Yukon river, might have been seen the little, dark bearded man poling
for dear life in a flat-bottom boat, whose prow was pointed in the
direction of the Klondike river.




CHAPTER II.

[Illustration]


IT WOULD be useless to encumber my story with a lengthy and detailed
narrative of Swiftwater Bill’s experiences in the first mad rush of
gold-seekers up the narrow and devious channels of Bonanza and Eldorado
Creeks. The world has for eleven years known the entrancing story of
George Carmack’s find on Bonanza--how, from the first spadeful of grass
roots, studded with gold dust and nuggets, which filled a tiny vial,
the gravel beds of Bonanza and Eldorado and a few adjoining creeks, all
situated within the area of a township or two, produced the marvelous
sum of $50,000,000 within a few years.

Swiftwater struck gold from the very first. He located No. 13 Eldorado,
and had as his neighbors such well known mining men as Prof. T. S.
Lippy, the Seattle millionaire, who left a poorly paid job as physical
director of the Y. M. C. A. in Seattle to prospect for gold in Alaska;
Ole Oleson; the Berry Bros., who cleaned up a million dollars on two
and a fraction claims on Eldorado; Antone Stander; Michael Dore,
a young French-Canadian, who died from exposure in a little cabin
surrounded by tin oil cans filled to overflowing with the yellow metal,
and others equally well known.

Swiftwater’s ground on No. 13 Eldorado was fabulously rich--so rich
that after he had struck the pay streak, the excitement was too much
for him and he forthwith struck out for the trail that leads to
Dawson. And now I am about to reveal to Alaskans and others who read
this little book a quality about Swiftwater of which few people had
any knowledge whatever, and this shows in a startling way how easy it
was in those halcyon days in the Golden Klondike for a man to grasp a
fortune of a million dollars in an instant and then throw it away with
the ease and indifference that a smoker discards a half-burned cigar.

Swiftwater, as may well be imagined, when he struck the rich layers of
gold in the candle-lit crevices of bedrock on Eldorado a few feet below
the surface, could have had a half interest in a half dozen claims on
each side of him if he had simply kept his mouth shut and informed
those he knew in Dawson of the strike, on condition that they would
share half and half with him. This was a common transaction in those
days and a perfectly legitimate one, and Swiftwater could have cleaned
up that winter beyond question $1,000,000 in gold dust, after paying
all expenses and doing very little work himself, had he exercised the
most common, ordinary business ability.

Instead, Swiftwater, when he struck Dawson, threw down a big poke of
gold on the bar of a saloon and announced his intention of buying out
the finest gambling hall and bar in town. Dawson was then the roughest
kind of a frontier mining camp, although the mounted police preserved
very good order. There were at least a score of gambling halls in
Dawson and as many more dance halls. The gambling games ran continually
twenty-four hours a day, and the smallest wager usually made, even in
the poorest games, was an ounce of gold, or almost $20.

When Bill laid down his poke of gold on the bar of a Dawson saloon--it
was so heavy he could hardly lift it--he was instantly surrounded by a
mob of thirty or forty men and a few women.

“Why, boys!” said Swiftwater, ordering a case of wine for the thirsty,
while he chose appolinaris himself, “that’s easy enough! All you’ve got
to do is to go up to Eldorado Creek and you can get all the gold you
want by simply working a rocker about a week.”

That settled the fate of Eldorado, for the next day before three
o’clock in the morning there was a stampede to the new find, and in
twenty-four hours the whole creek had been staked from mouth to source.

Comfortably enjoying the knowledge that he had $300,000 or $400,000 in
gold to the good, Swiftwater set about finding ways to spend it.

His first order “to the outside” was for a black Prince Albert coat and
a black silk top hat, which came in in about five or six weeks and were
immediately donned by Swiftwater. By this time he had become the owner
of the Monte Carlo, the biggest gambling hall in Dawson.

“Tear the roof off, boys!” Swiftwater said when the players on the
opening night swarmed in and asked what was the limit of the bets.

“The sky is the limit and raise her up as far as you want to go,
boys,” said Swiftwater, “and if the roof’s in your way, tear it off!”

Just about this time came the first of Swiftwater’s affaires d’l’amour,
because a day or two previously five young women of the Juneau dance
halls had floated down the river in a barge and gone to work in Dawson.
There were two sisters in the group. Both of them were beautiful women,
young, bright, entertaining and clever in the way such women are. They
were Gussie and May Lamore.

“I am going to have a lady and the swellest that’s in the country,”
Swiftwater told his friends, and then, donning his best clothes, the
costliest he could buy in Dawson, Swiftwater went over to the dance
hall, where the Lamore sisters were working, and ordered wine for
everybody on the floor.

Gussie was dancing with a big, brawny, French-Canadian miner. Her
little feet seemed scarcely to touch the floor of the dance hall as the
miner whirled her around and around. She was little, plump, beautifully
formed and with a face of more than passing comeliness.

You women of “the States”--when I say “the States” I simply speak of
our country as do all the old-timers in Alaska, and not as if it was
some foreign country, but as it really is to us, the home of ourselves
and our forebears, yet separated from us by thousands of miles of
iceclad mountain barriers and storm swept seas have no conception of
the dance hall girl as a type of the early days of Dawson. Many of them
were of good families, young, comely, and fairly well educated. What
stress or storm befell them, or other inhospitable element in their
lives drove them to the northern gold mining country, God knows it is
not my portion to tell. Nor could any one of them probably, in telling
her own life story, give the reasons for the appearance in these dance
halls of any of her sisters.

It is enough for you and me to understand--and it requires no unusual
insight into the human heart and its mysteries to do so--that when a
miner had spent a few months in the solitude of the hills and gold
lined gulches of the Yukon Valley, if he finally found the precious
gold on the rim of the bedrock, his first thought was to go back to
“town.”

Back to town? Yes, because “town” meant and still means to those hardy
men any place where human beings are assembled, and the dance hall, in
those rough days, was the center of social activities and gaieties.

The sight of little Gussie Lamore, with her skirt just touching
the tops of her shoes, spinning around in a waltz with that big
French-Canadian, set all of Bill’s amorous nature aglow. He went to the
hotel, filled his pockets with pokes of gold dust and came quickly back
to the dance hall, where he obtained an introduction to Gussie.

Bill’s wooing was of the rapid kind. Before the night was over he had
told Gussie--

“I’ll give you your weight in gold tomorrow morning if you will marry
me--and I guess you’ll weigh about $30,000.”

Pretty Gussie shook her head coquettishly. “We will just be friends,
Swiftwater, and I guess that’ll be about all.”

Of course, it was only a day or two before all Dawson knew of
Swiftwater’s infatuation. The two became fast friends and got along
beautifully for a week or two. Then came a bitter quarrel, and from
that arose the incident which gave Swiftwater Bill almost his greatest
fame--it is the story of how he cornered the egg market in Dawson in a
valiant effort to hold the love of his sweetheart, Gussie Lamore.

It was in the spring of 1898 and Dawson was very short of grub of
every kind. The average meal of canned soup, a plate of beans garnished
by a few slices of bacon or canned meat, with a little side dish of
canned or dried potatoes stewed, hot cakes or biscuit and coffee, cost
about $5 and sometimes more. The cheapest meal for two persons was $10,
and Bill had seen to it, while trying to win Gussie for his wife, that
she had the best there was to eat in Dawson.

The two were inseparable on the streets. Then came the quarrel--it was
simply a little lovers’ dispute, and then the break.

Swiftwater put in two days assiduously cultivating the friendly graces
of the other dance hall girls in Dawson, but Gussie cared not.

One night an adventurous trader came down from the Upper Yukon in a
small boat--there were no steamers then--and brought two crates of
fresh eggs from Seattle.

Swiftwater heard of this, and he knew that there would be a tremendous
demand for those eggs, as the miners usually made their breakfasts
of the evaporated article; so, shrewdly, he went immediately to the
restaurant which had purchased the crates and called for the proprietor.

Now, this worthy knew Swiftwater to be immensely wealthy and a very
good customer, so when the Eldorado miner demanded the right to buy
every egg in the house, which meant every egg in town, the restaurant
man stroked his chin and said:

“Swiftwater, those eggs cost me a big lot of money, and there hain’t no
more. You can have the hull outfit for three dollars an egg, in dust.”

There was just one whole crate left, and Swiftwater weighed out $2,280
in gold dust.

“Those eggs are mine--keep them here and don’t let anybody have any.”

Now, Swiftwater and Gussie had been in the habit of breakfasting on
fresh eggs some days before, when the first infrequent trader of the
season had managed, after enduring several wrecks on the upper river,
to reach Dawson. Fresh eggs were to Gussie what chocolates and bon bons
are to the average girl in the States.

The next morning Swiftwater arrived at the restaurant for breakfast,
a little earlier than usual, and in a few minutes the waiter placed
before him a steaming hot platter containing an even dozen of the eggs,
nicely poached and served on small strips of toast.

Just then Gussie came in for her breakfast and seated herself at the
other end of the little dining room. It was long after the usual hour
for breakfast, and they were the only two in the room. Without doing
Swiftwater the honor of passing so much as a glance in his direction,
Gussie said to the waiter:

“Bring me a full order of fried eggs.”

“We ain’t got no eggs, mum; they was all sold out last night,” said the
waiter.

Gussie’s face flamed with anger, but only for an instant. Then she
picked up her plate, her knife and fork and napkin and strode over to
the table where Swiftwater sat.

[Illustration: SWIFTWATER AND GUSSIE LAMORE ARE RECONCILED OVER A HOT
PLATTER OF FRESH EGGS, AT DAWSON.]

“I guess I’ll have some eggs, after all,” said Gussie, without looking
at Swiftwater, as she liberally helped herself from his platter.

Then both of them burst out laughing and peace reigned once more
between them.

Of course, Swiftwater figured that he had won a substantial victory by
reaching Gussie’s heart through her stomach. But, as a matter of fact,
we all figured that the laugh was on Swiftwater, and I think every
woman who reads this story will agree with me.




CHAPTER III.


SWIFTWATER has often told me that he never could quite understand
why it was that the way to a woman’s heart, even his own
way--Swiftwater’s--was so hard to travel and so devious and tortuous in
its windings and interwindings.

“Why, Mrs. Beebe,” Swiftwater used to say, “I should think a man
could do anything with gold! And for my own part, I used to always
figure that money would buy anything,” said Swiftwater, “even the most
beautiful woman in the world for your wife.”

Swiftwater’s mental processes were simple, as the foregoing will
illustrate. It was hardly to be expected otherwise. Swiftwater
decamped from the drudgery and slavish toil of a kitchen in the little
road-house at Circle City to gain in less than three months more money
than he had ever dreamed it possible for him to have.

Two hundred thousand dollars was the minimum of Swiftwater’s first big
clean-up. If Gussie Lamore had lovers, Swiftwater figured, his money
would win her heart away from all the rest.

All this relates very intimately to the really interesting story of
Swiftwater’s courtship of Gussie Lamore. The girl kept him at arm’s
length, yet if ever Swiftwater became restive Gussie would cleverly
draw the line taut and Swiftwater was at her feet.

“I am tired of this, Gussie,” said Swiftwater one day, and finally the
“Knight of the Golden Omelette,” as he was often termed, was serious
for once in his life.

“I am going back to Eldorado and I’ll bring down here a bunch of gold.
It will weigh as much as you do on the scales, pound for pound. Gussie,
that gold will be yours if you give me your word you will marry me.”

“All right, Bill, we’ll see. Go get your gold and show me that you
really have it.”

Swiftwater was gone from Dawson about two days before he returned to
the dance hall where Gussie was working. This time he kept away from
the bar and merely waited until the morning dawned and the habitues of
the dance hall had disappeared one by one. By that time the word had
been sent out to Seattle of the rich findings of gold on Eldorado, and
the early crop of newcomers was arriving over the ice from Dyea, in the
days before the Skagway trail was known.

Swiftwater, in the early morning, carried to Gussie’s apartments two
tin coffee cans filled with the yellow gold.

“Here’s all you weigh, anyhow,” said Swiftwater. “Now, take this gold
to the Trading Company’s office and bank it. Then I want you to buy a
ticket to San Francisco and I will meet you there this summer and we
will be married.”

Thus ended the curious story of Swiftwater’s wooing of Gussie Lamore.
All the world knows how, when Gussie reached San Francisco, where her
folks lived, she banked Swiftwater’s gold and turned him down cold.

Swiftwater reached the Golden Gate a month after Gussie had arrived at
her home. All his entreaties for her to carry out her bargain came to
nothing.

Bitter as he was towards Gussie, Swiftwater still seemed to love the
girl. His first creed, “I can buy any woman with gold,” seemed to stick
with him.

There was, for one thing, little Grace Lamore. It came to Swiftwater
that he could marry Grace and punish Gussie for her inconstancy.

Now, this may seem to you, my reader, like an ill-founded story. Yet
the truth is, Grace and Swiftwater were married within a month of his
arrival in San Francisco, and the San Francisco papers were filled with
the story of how Swiftwater bought his bride a $15,000 home in Oakland
and furnished it most beautifully with all that money could buy.

Swiftwater and Grace, after a two days’ wedding trip down the San
Joaquin Valley leased the bridal chamber of the Baldwin Hotel, while
their new home in Oakland was being fitted up. Old-time Alaskans
will smile when I recall the impression that Swiftwater made on San
Franciscans.

It was his invariable custom to stand in front of the lobby of the
Baldwin every evening, smoothly shaved, his moustaches nicely brushed
and curled, and wearing his favorite black Prince Albert and silk hat.

Probably few in the throng that came and went through the lobby of
the Baldwin--in those days one of the most popular hostelries in San
Francisco--would have paid any attention to Swiftwater. But Bill knew
a trick or two and his old-time friends have told me that Swiftwater
made it an unfailing custom to tip the bell-boys a dollar each a day to
point to the dapper little man and have them tell both guests of the
Baldwin and strangers:

“There is Swiftwater Bill Gates, the King of the Klondike.”

And Swiftwater would stand every evening, silk hat on his head, spick
and span, and clean, and bow politely to everybody as they came in
through the lobby to the dining hall.

[Illustration: SWIFTWATER GREETS STRANGERS IN THE LOBBY OF THE BALDWIN
HOTEL, WHOM HE HAD NEVER SEEN BEFORE.]

Isn’t it curious, that with all his money, and his confidence in the
purchasing power of gold, Swiftwater’s dream of love with Grace Lamore
should have lasted scarcely more than a short three weeks? It was
not that Swiftwater was parsimonious with is money--the very finest
of silks and satins, millinery, diamonds at Shreve’s, cut glass and
silverware, were Grace’s for the asking. They will tell you in San
Francisco to this day that Swiftwater and his bride worked overtime in
a carriage shopping in the most expensive houses in the city of the
Golden Gate.

Then came the break with Grace. I do not know the cause, but the girl
threw Swiftwater overboard and left the bridal chamber of the Baldwin
to return to her family, even before they had occupied the palatial
home in Oakland.

Swiftwater’s rage knew no bounds. In his heart he cursed the whole
Lamore family and quickly took means to vent his spite.

This is how it came about that scarcely a month after Swiftwater’s
wedding bells had rung, the “Knight of the Golden Omelette” was seen
to enter his Oakland home one evening and emerge therefrom a half hour
later bearing on his back a heavy bundle wrapped in a bed sheet.

[Illustration: SWIFTWATER BILL CARRYING $7,000 WORTH OF WEDDING
PRESENTS FROM HIS BRIDE’S HOME IN OAKLAND.]

The burden was all that Swiftwater’s-strength could manage. Laboriously
he toiled his way to the house of a friend in Oakland and wearily
deposited his bundle on the front porch, where he sat and waited the
coming of his friend.

When Swiftwater was finally admitted to the house, he untied the sheet
and opened up the contents of the pack. There lay glittering on the
floor $7,000 worth of solid silver plate and cut glass.

“That’s what I gave my bride,” he said, “and now she’s quit me and I’m
d----d if she’ll have that.”




CHAPTER IV.


IT HAS always seemed a standing wonder to me that when Swiftwater
had separated himself from about $100,000 or more in gold dust with
the Lamore sisters as the chief beneficiaries, and after he had
been divorced from Grace, following her refusal to live with him in
San Francisco, he did not finally come within a rifle shot of the
realization of the real value of money. There is no doubt but that
Swiftwater was bitterly resentful towards Gussie and Grace Lamore after
they had both thrown him overboard, and you will no doubt agree with
me that to an ordinary man such experiences as these would have had a
sobering effect.

Instead, however, the miner plunged more recklessly than ever into all
manner of money-making and money-spending, and the only reason that
Swiftwater Bill Gates is not ranked today with Flood, Mackay and Fair
as one of a group of the greatest and richest mining men the Pacific
Coast has produced, is that he did not have the balance wheel of
caution and discretion that is given to the ordinary artisan or day
laborer.

Swiftwater left San Francisco soon after his rupture with Grace Lamore
and went directly to Ottawa, Canada, where, marvelous as it may seem in
the light of the ten years of mining history in the north, Swiftwater
induced the Dominion government to grant him a concession on Quartz
Creek, in the Klondike, worth today millions upon millions.

This concession covered an immense tract of ground at least three
miles long and in some places two miles wide. Much of the ground was
very rich, and today, ten years later, it is paying big dividends. Yet
rich as it was and immensely valuable as was the enormous concession,
Swiftwater induced the Dominion of Canada authorities to part with
it for merely a nominal consideration. His success in this respect
cannot be otherwise regarded than phenomenal. Although his money was
nearly all gone, Swiftwater, taking a new grip on himself, and entirely
disregardful of the fates which had been so lavish to him, went from
Ottawa to London, England, where he obtained enough money to buy and
ship to Dawson one of the largest and most expensive hydraulic plants
in the country.

When this plant was shipped to Seattle in 1898, Swiftwater followed it
to the city on Elliott Bay.

It was the day following Swiftwater Bill’s arrival in Seattle from San
Francisco in the spring of 1899 that Mr. Richardson, an old Seattle
friend of mine, who knew Gates well, telephoned me that Swiftwater had
an elegant suite of apartments at the Butler Hotel, and that he had
asked him to arrange for an introduction. Mr. Richardson said over the
telephone:

“You ought to know Swiftwater--he knows everybody in Dawson and the
Klondike, and for a woman like you to go into that country with a big
hotel outfit and no friends would be ridiculous.”

When I think of what happened to me and my daughters, Blanche and Bera,
in the next few days following this incident, and of the years of
wretchedness and misery and laying waste of human lives and happiness
that came after, I am tempted to wonder what curious form of an unseen
fate shapes our destinies and turns and twists our fortunes in all
manner of devious and uncertain ways.

My whole hotel outfit had gone up to St. Michael the fall previous and
I with it--and at great cost of labor and trouble I had seen to it, at
St. Michael, that the precious shipment--representing all I had in the
world--was safely stored aboard a river steamer bound for Dawson.

Now, spring had come again, and with it the big rush to the gold
fields of the Yukon was on, and Seattle was again filled with a
seething, surging, struggling, discontented, optimistic, laughing crowd
of gold hunters of every nationality and color.

It was almost worth your life to try to break through the mob and gain
admission to the lobby of the Hotel Butler in those days, for the place
was absolutely packed at night with men as thick as sardines in a box,
and all shouting and gesticulating and keeping up such a clatter that
it drove one nearly crazy.

It was no place for a woman, and the few women whose fortunes or whose
husbands had brought them thither were seated in a little parlor on the
second floor, where they could easily hear the clamor and confusion
that came from the noisy mob in the lobby.

In the crowd were such old-time sourdoughs as Ole Olson, who sold
out a little piece of ground about as big as a city block on Eldorado
for $250,000, after he had taken out as much more in three months’
work the winter previous; “French Curley” De Lorge, known from White
Horse to the mouth of the Tanana, as one of the Yukon’s bravest and
strongest hearted trappers and freighters; Joe Ladue, who laid out the
town of Dawson; George Carmack, whose Indian brother-in-law, Skookum
Jim, is supposed to have turned over the first spadeful of grass
roots studded with gold on the banks of Bonanza; big Tom Henderson,
who found gold before anybody, he always said on Quartz Creek; Joe
Wardner and Phil O’Rourke, both famous in the Coeur d’Alenes; Henry
Bratnober, six feet two, black beard, shaggy black hair and black eyes,
overbearing and coarse voiced, the representative in the golden north
of the Rothschilds of London; and men almost equally well known from
Australia, from South Africa and from continental Europe, including the
vigilant and energetic Count Carbonneau of Paris.

By appointment, Swiftwater, attired in immaculate black broadcloth
Prince Albert, low cut vest, patent leather shoes, shimmering “biled”
shirt, with a four-karat diamond gleaming like an electric light from
his bosom, stood waiting for us in the parlor. I had left Bera, who was
fifteen years old, in my apartments in the Hinckley Block and had taken
Blanche, my eldest daughter, with me.

“I am awfully glad to meet you, Mrs. Beebe,” said Swiftwater, advancing
with step as noiseless as a Maltese cat, as he walked across the heavy
plush carpet.

Swiftwater put out a soft womanish hand, grasped mine and spoke in a
low musical voice, the kind of voice that instantly wins the confidence
of nine women out of ten.

“I have heard that you were going in this spring, and as I know how
hard it is for a woman to get along in that country without someone to
befriend her, I was very glad indeed to have the chance of extending
you all the aid in my power,” continued Swiftwater, in the meantime
glancing in an interested way at Blanche, who stood near the piano.

“This is my daughter, Blanche, Mr. Gates,” I said. Blanche was then
nineteen years old, and I had taken her out of the Convent school in
Portland to keep me company in the north, along with Bera.

It only took us a few minutes to agree that when I arrived in Dawson,
if Swiftwater was there first, he should help me in getting a location
for my hotel and settling down. Then, as I arose to go, he said,
turning again to Blanche:

“Doesn’t your daughter play the piano, Mrs. Beebe? I am very fond of
music.”

Blanche, at a nod from me, sat down and began to play some simple
little thing, when Swiftwater said:

“Please excuse me, I have a friend with me.”

In a moment Swiftwater returned and introduced his friend, a tall,
lithe, clean-cut, smooth shaven Englishman of about thirty-five--Mr.
Hathaway.

Five minutes later, Blanche having pleased both men with her playing,
arose from the piano.

“Now, we are just going down to dinner in the grill; won’t you please
join us, ladies?” said Swiftwater in those deliciously velvet tones
which seemed to put any woman at perfect ease in his company.

A shivery feeling came over me, and I said: “No, I think we will go
right home.”

Now, I never could tell for the life of me just what made me want
to hurry away with my Blanche from the hotel and Swiftwater Bill.
His friend Hathaway was a nice clean looking sort of a chap and
very gentlemanly, and Swiftwater was the absolute quintessence of
gentlemanly conduct and chivalry. But the papers had told all about
Swiftwater and Gussie and Grace Lamore--only that the reporters, as
well as the general public, seemed to regard it all as a joke--Gussie’s
turning down Swiftwater after he had given her her weight in
gold--about $30,000 in virgin dust and nuggets--and then Bill’s
marrying Grace, her sister, for spite. The whole yarn struck me so
funny, that as we walked, with difficulty, through the crowds on Second
Avenue to our apartments, I could not think of anything mean or vicious
about Swiftwater.

Nevertheless, I scrupulously avoided inviting Swiftwater to call,
and after I had concluded my business with him, I determined to have
nothing more to do with him until business matters made it necessary in
Dawson. You women, who live “on the outside” and have never been over
the trail and down the Yukon in a scow, can never know what fortitude
is necessary for a woman to cut loose from the States and make her own
way in business in a new gold camp like Dawson was in 1899.

So it was only natural, that, knowing Swiftwater to be one of the
leading and richest men in that country, I should have accepted his
offer of assistance and advice. God only knows how different would
have been all our lives could I but have foreseen the awful misery and
wretchedness and ruin which that man Swiftwater easily worked in the
lives of three innocent people who had never done him wrong, or anyone
else, for that matter.

Three days after my glimpse of Swiftwater Bill, Bera and myself were
just finishing dressing for dinner in my big sitting room. It was
rather warm for a spring evening in Seattle, and we were all hungry.
Blanche was waiting near the door fully dressed, I was putting on my
gloves, and little Bera, fifteen years old, stood in front of the
mirror trying to fasten down a big bunch of wavy brown hair of silken
glossy texture, which was doing its best to get from under her big
white Leghorn hat, the child looking the very picture of beauty and
innocence.

She was plump, with deliciously pink cheeks, great big blue eyes,
regular features and she wore a dress I had had made at great expense
in Victoria--it was of dark blue voile, close fitting, with a lining
of red silk, which showed the cardinal as the girl turned and walked
across the room and then back again to the mirror. Her white Leghorn
hat was trimmed with large red roses. I heard a noise, as if someone
had knocked and Bera, turning quickly, said under her breath, as if
alarmed:

“Mama! There is somebody there!”

I looked and there stood Swiftwater, silk hat in hand, smiling, bowing,
one foot across the threshold, while behind him loomed the tall form of
his friend Hathaway.

“Pardon us, won’t you, Mrs. Beebe, but we want you to go to dinner with
us at the Butler. Won’t you do so and bring the girls?” and Swiftwater
instantly turned his eyes from mine and looked at Bera standing
in front of the mirror, her face flushed, her eyes sparkling with
excitement and her form silhouetted against a red plush curtain which
covered the door to the adjoining room.

Before I could gather my wits about me I had accepted Swiftwater’s
invitation. It was the only thing I could do, because we were
just about to go to dinner ourselves, and he seemed to know that
instinctively, and that I could not very well refuse.




CHAPTER V.


“MAMA,” said Bera to me, “Mrs. Ainslee is not nearly so well today, and
Mr. Hathaway said when he came down from the hospital this afternoon
that she wanted to see you sure this evening about seven o’clock.”
Mrs. Ainslee had been desperately ill at Providence Hospital for weeks
and she was a woman of whom I had known in earlier days and whose
sad plight--her husband was dead and she was alone in the world--had
induced me to do all I could for her.

It was scarcely more than a week following the evening that Swiftwater
and Mr. Hathaway was host at dinner at the hotel, that Bera took,
what I realized afterwards, was an unusual and unexpected interest in
Mrs. Ainslee’s case. Since the dinner engagement, Swiftwater had been
just ordinarily attentive to myself and my two daughters, although
frequently asking us to go to the theatre with him and sending flowers
almost daily to our apartments. I had not seen Mrs. Ainslee for two or
three days, and my conscience rather troubled me about her, so that
when, on this day--a day that will never fade from my mind as long as I
live, nor from that of Bera or Swiftwater--I quickly fell into Bera’s
plans and determined to get some things together for Mrs. Ainslee,
including a bunch of roses from a vase on my dresser, and go to the
hospital after dinner.

Providence Hospital was scarcely more than five blocks from our
apartments. I had not seen anything of Swiftwater or Hathaway all day.
Tired even beyond the ordinary--it had been a long, hard fight to get
my affairs in shape for the northern trip--I left the apartments a
little before seven o’clock that fateful evening and walked up Second
Avenue to Madison and thence up to Fifth Avenue to Providence Hospital.

“Mrs. Ainslee is feeling some better, Mrs. Beebe, but the doctor is in
there now and you will have to wait for a few minutes,” the head nurse
told me at the landing on the second floor. The steamer “Humboldt”
was sailing for Alaska that night, and I had managed to get off a few
things consigned to myself at Dawson and had seen them safely placed
aboard ship.

As I sat waiting for the signal to come into Mrs. Ainslee’s room--it
must have been a half hour or more before the nurse came to me and said
I should enter--a curious feeling came over me regarding Bera. I had
never known of her speaking about Mrs. Ainslee and somehow or other I
could not get out of my mind the thought that possibly Swiftwater and
his friend Hathaway might leave for Skagway on the “Humboldt.”

Philosophers may talk of a woman’s sixth sense as some people talk of
the cunning of a cat. Whatever it was, as the nurse beckoned me to come
into Mrs. Ainslee’s room, I quickly arose, went in and said to the sick
woman:

“Mrs. Ainslee, I am awfully glad to see that you are better and I
wanted to visit with you for an hour, but I have overstayed my time
already and I must hurry back to my rooms.”

Then I quickly turned and in another minute I was hurrying down the
Madison Street hill to the Hinckley Block. In every step I took
nearer my home there came a keener and more tense pulling at my heart
strings--a feeling that something had happened in my own home. It was
no wonder that the elevator boy in the Hinckley Block was dumb-founded
to see me rush across Second Avenue and half way up the stairs to the
second floor before he could call to me, saying he would take me up in
the car if I was not in too big a hurry.

The next moment I was in my rooms, and for the life of me I cannot
begin to describe their looks. My clothes and personal belongings were
scattered all over the room, my big trunk had been emptied of its
contents and was missing. The bureau drawers were empty and the place
really looked like a Kansas rancher’s house after a cyclone.

On the dresser was a little note--in Bera’s handwriting, held down by a
bronze paperweight surmounted by a tiny, but beautiful miniature of a
woman’s form. It was Bera’s last birthday gift to me.

 “We have gone to Alaska with Swiftwater and Mr. Hathaway. Do not worry,
 mama, as when we get there we will look out for your hotel.”

  “BERA.”

That was Bera’s note. I looked at my watch. It was 7:25 and I knew the
“Humboldt” sailed at 8 o’clock. I rushed down four flights of stairs,
never thinking of the elevator, gained the street and hailed a passing
hackman.

“You can have this if you get to the ‘Humboldt’ at Schwabacher’s dock
before she sails!” I cried as the cabby drew his team to the curb, and
then I handed him a ten dollar gold piece.

Whipping his horses to a gallop, the hackman drove at a furious pace
down First Avenue to Spring Street and thence to the dock. He all but
knocked over a policeman as the horses under his whip surged through
the crowd which stood around the dock waiting for the departure of the
“Humboldt.”

“My two daughters are on that boat and Swiftwater Bill Gates has
stolen them from me!” I shouted as I grabbed hold of the arm of a big
policeman near the entrance to the dock. “I want you to get those girls
off that boat before she sails, no matter what happens!”

In another minute the policeman was fighting his way with all the force
of his 250 pounds through the mob of five thousand people that hung
around the gang plank of the “Humboldt.” The ship’s lights were burning
brightly and everybody was laughing and talking, and a few women crying
as they said goodby to husbands, sweethearts or friends aboard the ship.

It was just exactly ten minutes before sailing time when we finally
made our way to the main deck through the crowd. I fairly shouted to
the captain on the bridge:

“My two daughters are on this ship hidden away, and I want them taken
off this boat before you leave!”

Capt. Bateman looked at me a moment as if he wanted to throw me
overboard.

“Who are your daughters and what are they doing on my ship?”

“My daughters are Blanche and Bera Beebe and Swiftwater Bill has
stolen them and is taking them to Alaska. I am Mrs. Beebe, their
mother.”

For the moment that ended the discussion with Capt. Bateman. Instantly
turning to a quartermaster, he said:

“Help this woman find her daughters!”

A half an hour and then an hour passed as we worked our way from one
stateroom to another on the saloon deck and the upper deck without
avail. Capt. Bateman was furious at the delay.

“Mrs. Beebe, I do not believe your daughters are here,” he said.
“Swiftwater has engaged one room, but we have not seen him yet.”

Just then the quartermaster turned to unlock the door of a stateroom on
the starboard side near the stern of the ship. The lock failed to work.

“There is somebody in there,” he said, “and the dock is locked from the
inside.”

“Break it in!” ordered Capt. Bateman.

The next instant the door flew off its hinges as the big quartermaster
shoved a burly shoulder against it. The room was dark. I rushed in, to
find Bera lying on the couch, sobbing as if her heart would break.

As quickly as possible, I got the girls out and turned them over to the
custody of Capt. Bateman.

“These are my daughters, and I will not allow them to be taken from me.”

“Take ’em ashore!” ordered Capt. Bateman to the quartermaster.

[Illustration: “COME TO THE STATION WITH US,” SAID THE OFFICER,
DRAGGING FORTH THE SHAPELESS MASS, AND HELPING SWIFTWATER ADJUST HIS
SILK TILE.]

“But I want you to find that scoundrel Swiftwater!” said I, turning on
the policeman, who stood just behind me.

“You’ll not keep us here any longer,” angrily said the ship’s master.

“O, yes, we will!” said the officer, showing more grit than I expected.

Then began the search all over again. The hurricane deck was the last
resort, the ship having been searched from her hold clear through the
steerage and saloon cabins to the main deck.

On the main deck there were a half dozen lifeboats securely lashed
their proper places. It was dark by this time, but, curiously enough,
there was a little fluttering electric arc light near the end of the
warehouse on the dock, close to the after end of the boat.

That lamp must have been burning that night through some of the
mysterious and indefinable laws of Providence or some other thing,
because by its glare I could see a huddled, shapeless, black form
underneath the last lifeboat on the upper deck.

“That’s him!” I said, pointing at the shapeless mass in the shadow of
the lifeboat.

The policeman walked over to the boat, stretched forth a big muscular
arm, grasped the formless object and drew forth--Swiftwater Bill.

“Come to the station with us,” said the officer, as he helped Bill
adjust his silk tile.




CHAPTER VI.


A FULL thirty days after Swiftwater and Hathaway had left Seattle,
following the affair on the decks of the steamer “Humboldt,” found the
miner and his friend in Skagway. It was in the height of the spring
rush to the gold fields, and there are undoubtedly few, if any, living
today who will ever witness on this continent such scenes as were
enacted on the terrible Skagway trail over the Coast Range of the
Alaska mountains, which separated 50,000 eager, struggling, quarreling,
frenzied men and women drawn thither by the mad rush for gold from the
upper reaches of the Yukon River and the lakes which helped to form
that mighty stream.

No pen can adequately portray the bitter clash, and struggling, and
turmoil--man against man, man against woman, woman against man, fist
against fist, gun against gun, as this mob of gold-crazed human beings
surged into the vortex of the Yukon’s valley and found their way to the
new Golconda of the north.

Skagway was a whirling, tumbling, seething whirlpool of humanity.
Imagine the spectacle of a mob of 40,000 half-crazed human beings
assembled at the foot of the almost impassable White Pass, with the
thermometer 90 degrees in the shade at the foot of the range, and ten
feet of snow on the Summit, three miles away. Then picture to this, if
you can, the innumerable crimes against humanity that broke out in this
mob of half-crazy, fighting, excited, bewildered multitude of men and
women.

There was no rest in the town--no sleep--no time for meals--no time for
repose--nothing but a mad scramble and the devil take the hindmost.

There was one cheap, newly constructed frame hotel in Skagway and rooms
were from $5 to $20 a day. The only wharf of the town was packed fifty
feet high with merchandise of every description--65 per cent. canned
provisions, flour and dried fruits and the rest of it hardware, mining
tools and clothing for the prospectors. Teams of yelping, snarling,
fighting malamutes added their cries to the eternally welling mass of
sound.

And Swiftwater was there. Almost the first face I saw as I entered the
hotel was that of Gates.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he said, “let us forget bygones. In another day or two I
would have been over the Summit with my outfit. It is lucky that I am
here, because possibly I can help you in some way.”

I could do nothing more than listen to what Swiftwater said. There
was no other hotel, or indeed any place in the town where I could get
shelter for myself and my two girls. Knowing the black purpose in
Swiftwater’s heart, I watched my girls Bera and Blanche day and night.
My own goods were piled up unsheltered and unprotected on the beach.

Swiftwater, with all his cunning, could not deceive me of his real
intent, yet my own perplexities and troubles made it easy for him to
keep me in constant fear of him.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he would say, “you can trust me absolutely.”

With that, Swiftwater’s face would take on a smile as innocent as
that of a babe. There was always the warm, soft clasp of the womanish
hand--the low pitched voice of Swiftwater to keep it company.

And now, as I remember how innocent Bera was, how girlish she looked,
how confiding she was in me, yet never for a moment forgetting,
perhaps, the lure of the gold studded gravel banks of Eldorado which
Swiftwater held constantly before her, it seems to my mind that no
woman can be wronged as deeply and as eternally as that woman whose
daughter is stolen from her through guile and soft deceit.

We had been in Skagway but a trifle more than a week, when, one
evening, returning to the hotel, I found my room empty and Bera missing.

“I have gone with Swiftwater to Dawson, Mamma. He loves me and I love
him.” This was what Bera had written and left on her dresser.

That was all. There was one chance only to prevent the kidnaping of
Bera. That was for me to get to the lakes on the other side of the
mountains, at the head of navigation on the Yukon and seek the aid of
the Canadian mounted police.

At White Horse, there was trace of Swiftwater and Bera, but they had
twenty-four hours the start of me and, when I finally found that they
had gone through to Dawson, I simply quit.

Down the Upper Yukon there was a constant stream of barges, small boats
and rafts. Miles Canyon, with its madly rushing, white-capped waters,
extending over five miles of rock-ribbed river bed and sand bar, was
scattered o’er with timbers, boards, boxes and casks containing the
outfits and all the worldly possessions of scores of unfortunates.

“On, on, and ever and eternally on, down the Yukon to Dawson!”
That was the cry in those days and it bore, as unresistingly and as
mercilessly as the tide of the ocean carries the flotsam and jetsam
of seacoast harbors, the brave and the strong, the weak and crippled,
the wise and the foolish, in one inchoate mass of humanity to that
magic spot where more gold lay underground waiting for the pick of the
poverty-struck miner than the world had ever known of--“The Klondike.”

All things finally come to an end. I was in Dawson. At the little
temporary dock on the Yukon’s bank, stood Bera and Swiftwater. The
miner did not wait till I landed from the little boat. He went up the
gang plank and grasped me in his arms.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he said, “we’re married. Come with us to our cabin. We
are waiting for you, and dinner is on the table.”

Swiftwater during all that summer and winter in Dawson was the very
soul of chivalry and attention both to Bera and myself. There was
nothing too good for us in the little market places at Dawson and a box
of candy at $5 a box just to please Bera or to satisfy my own taste for
sweetmeats was no more to Swiftwater than the average man spending a
two-bit piece on the outside.

As the spring broke up the river and then summer took the place of
spring in Dawson, the traders from the outside brought in supplies of
fresh eggs, fresh oranges, lettuce, new onions--all the delicacies
greatly to be prized and more esteemed after a long winter than the
rarest fruits and dainties of the States.

When summer came, Dawson got its first shipment of new watermelons
from the outside, Swiftwater bought the first melon he could find and
paid $40 in dust for it, and brought it home, simply to please Bera and
to make his home that much happier.




CHAPTER VII.


HYDRAULIC mining in the Klondike country, by the time that Swiftwater
had assembled his big outfit on Quartz Creek was in its very infancy,
yet there were plenty of wise men in Dawson who knew that the tens of
thousands of acres of hillside slopes and old abandoned creek beds
would some day produce more gold when washed into sluice boxes with
gigantic rams, than the native miner and prospector had been able to
show, even with the figures, $50,000,000, output to his credit.

The Canadian government had given Swiftwater and his partner, Joe
Boyle, a princely fortune in the three mile concession on Quartz Creek.
So great was the reputation of Swiftwater Bill--so intimately was
his name linked with the idea of immense quantities of gold--and so
high was his standing as a practical miner, that Swiftwater was able
to borrow money right and left to carry on his work on Quartz Creek.
Thus it was that before anybody could realize it, including myself,
Swiftwater’s financial standing actually was $100,000 worse off than
nothing. This was about the amount of money that he used and in that
tidy sum was all the savings of my winter in Dawson and my dividends
from my hotel, which aggregated at least $35,000.

“When Joe comes in this spring from London,” said Swiftwater to me,
“we’ll have all the money we want and more, too, Mrs. Beebe. He has
cabled twice to Seattle that our money is all raised and we will have a
million-dollar clean-up on Quartz Creek this fall.”

As the spring came on and reports from the mines on Quartz Creek became
brighter, Swiftwater became more enthusiastic and confident. The fact
that his creditors were beginning to worry, and that there is a nasty
law in Canada which affects debtors who seek to leave the country in a
restraining way, did not seriously worry Swiftwater. He seemed to think
more of the coming of his child than anything else, next to the work on
Quartz Creek.

“That baby is going to be born on Quartz Creek, Mrs. B--” Swiftwater
said. “It is my determination that my first child shall be born where I
will make a greater fortune than anybody hereabouts.”

I told Swiftwater that he was talking arrant nonsense.

“It would be the death of Bera in her condition,” said I, “for her to
take the trip up there in this cold, nasty weather, with the roads more
like swamps than anything else and the hills still covered with snow.
More than that, there are doctors here in Dawson and on Quartz Creek we
would be thirty miles from the nearest human settlement.”

But nothing would deter Swiftwater. He set about rigging up a big sled
which could be pulled by two horses. It was made of heavy oaken timber,
and the long low bed was filled with furs, blankets, bedding, etc.
Swiftwater went to Dr. Marshall, our physician, when all arrangements
had been practically completed for the journey to Quartz. He had
effectually stopped my protests before he said to Dr. Marshall:

“I will give you $2,000 or more, if necessary, to take six weeks off
and go with me up to Quartz Creek where my child will be born. Just
name your figure if that is not enough.”

Bera was seventeen years old, immature and delicate, yet brave and
strong, and willing to imperil her own life to gratify Swiftwater’s
whim. So it finally came about that I was delegated to do the final
shopping in advance of our journey.

I went to Gandolfo’s and bought with my own money a case of oranges
and a crate of apples. Each orange cost $3 in dust and the apples about
the same. Next I ordered a barrel of bottled beer, for Swiftwater
wanted to treat his men with a feast when the baby was born and the
bottled beer was what he thought to be the proper thing. The barrel of
beer cost me close to $500 in gold.

[Illustration: BERA BEEBE GATES From a photograph taken at
Washington, D. C., where she was deserted by Swiftwater Bill.]

All this stuff was loaded on the sled. They started over the
twenty-eight miles of crooked, winding, marshy trail to Quartz Creek.
The journey was something terrible. The days were short and the wind
from the hills and gulches was wet with the thawing of the snow and so
cold that it seemed to make icicles of the drippings from the trees.
Bera, wrapped a foot thick in furs, seemed to stand the trip all right,
and in due time the baby was born and christened.

There was great rejoicing in the camp and Swiftwater weighed out $3,000
in dust to Dr. Marshall and sent him back to Dawson. A month afterwards
one of our men brought from Dawson the word that the mail had arrived
over the ice, but Swiftwater looked in vain for a letter from Joe
Boyle. He had confidently expected a draft for $50,000.

For two days Swiftwater scarcely spoke. The cabin in which we lived
was only a quarter of a mile from the nearest dump where the men were
working. I used to go out every once in a while and take up a few
shovels full of gravel which would wash out between $5 and $10 and if
I had had the good common sense which comes only after years of hard
knocks in this troublesome world, I could then and there have protected
myself against the bitter misfortunes which came to me in a few months
afterwards.

I was washing some of the baby’s clothes in the kitchen and drying them
on a line over the fire, when Swiftwater came in from the diggings,
clad in his rubber boots which reached to his hips.

The miner asked for some hot water and a towel and began to shave the
three weeks’ black growth from his chin.

“What are you going to do now, Swiftwater?” I asked.

“I’m going down to town.”

For two days the cabin had been without food except some mush and a few
dried potatoes and a can of condensed milk for the baby. Swiftwater had
sent a man over the trail to Dawson for food two days before.

“You’ll not go without Bera! You are not going to leave us here to
starve,” said I.

“Bera cannot possibly go,” said Bill.

I turned and went to Bera’s room and told her to dress immediately.
Then I washed the baby, put an entire new change of clothes on him,
wrapped up his freshly ironed garments in a package, got a bottle of
soothing syrup and a can of condensed milk.

It was always my belief and is now, that Swiftwater’s mind contained a
plan to abandon Bera, the baby and me, and to run away from the Yukon
to escape his troubles.

We got a small boat and filled one end of it with fir boughs, covered
them over with rugs, and put Bera and the baby there. Then Swiftwater
and I got in the boat and pushed off down stream.

Swiftwater confessed to me for the first time that he was in serious
trouble.

“There have been three strange men from Dawson out here on our claims,”
said Swiftwater, “and I know who sent them out. They are watching me.”

As I look back upon that awful trip down Indian River, with poor, wan,
white-faced Bera hugging the little three weeks’ old baby to her bosom,
so sick that she could hardly talk, I wonder if there is any hardship,
and peril, and privation, and suffering, a woman cannot endure.

The boat was heavy--terribly heavy. In the small stretches of still
water it was desperately hard, bone-racking toil to keep moving.

In the rushes of the river, where rapids tore at mill-race speed over
boulders and pebbly stretches, we were constantly in danger of being
upset. An hour of this sort of work made me almost ready for any sort
of fate.

Finally we struck a big rock and the current carried us on a stretch
of sandy beach. Swiftwater and I got out and waded up to our armpits
in the cold stream to get the boat started again. Then we climbed
aboard and once more shot down the rocky canyon to another stretch of
still water beyond. By nightfall we had reached an old cabin half way
to Dawson, in which the fall before Swiftwater had cached provisions.
The baby’s food was all gone, and Bera, in a fit of anger, had thrown
what little bread and butter sandwiches we had put up for ourselves,
overboard. I had not eaten all day, nor had Swiftwater.

It was growing dusk when we painfully pulled the boat on the bank at
Swiftwater’s cache. Gates went inside to get some grub and prepared to
build a fire. He came out a moment later, his face ashy pale, his eyes
downcast.

“They have stolen all I had put in here,” he said.

It seemed to me that night as if the very limit of human misery on this
earth was my bitter portion as we waited all through the weary hours in
the cabin huddled before a little fire, waiting (it is light all the
time in summer) to resume our journey to Dawson.

The next day we reached Dawson shortly after noon, famished, cold, and
completely exhausted. I actually believe the baby would have died but
for the bottle of soothing syrup and water which I had brought along.

Swiftwater took us to the Fairview Hotel and sent for the doctor for
Bera and the baby.




CHAPTER VIII.


TO THE people of Dawson, in those days, starving through weary winter
months for want of frequent mail communication with the civilized
world, and hungering for the ebb and flow of human tide that is a
natural and daily part of the lives of those in more fortunate places,
the arrival of the first steamer from “the outside” in the spring is an
event even greater than a Fourth of July celebration to a country town
in Kansas.

For days before our arrival down Indian River from Quartz Creek, the
men and women of Dawson had eagerly discussed the probability of the
coming of the Yukoner, the regular river liner from White Horse due any
moment, with fresh provisions from Seattle and the first papers and
letters from “the outside.”

For two days after Swiftwater had taken Bera to the Fairview Hotel,
the doctor had cared for her so as to enable her to recover from the
hardships of the trip down Indian River. I took the baby to my own
rooms and carefully nursed him through all one day. This brought him
quickly round, and he soon looked as bright and cheerful as a new
twenty dollar gold piece.

It was on the third morning after we arrived in Dawson that the steamer
Yukoner’s whistle sounded up the river, and the whole populace rushed
to the wharves and river banks. Miners came from all points up the
creeks to welcome friends or to get their mail that the Yukoner had
brought. The little shopkeepers in Dawson, particularly the fruit
venders, were extremely active, bustling amongst the crowd on the dock
and fighting their way to get the first shipments of early vegetables,
fruits, fresh eggs, fresh butter and other perishable commodities for
which Dawson hungered.

But Swiftwater, keen eyed, nervous, straining, yet trying to be
composed, saw none of this, nor felt the least interest in the tide of
newcomers who stepped from the Yukoner’s decks and made their way up
town surrounded by friends.

Swiftwater was looking for one face in the crowd--that of his partner,
Joe Boyle, who had promised to bring him $100,000 from London, where
the big concession on Quartz Creek had been bonded for $250,000.

Swiftwater stood at the gang plank and eagerly scanned every face until
the last man had come ashore and only the deck hands remained on board.

“There is certainly a letter in the mail, anyhow,” said Swiftwater.

For the first time in all of this miserable experience I realized that
a heavy burden was on Swiftwater’s shoulders--a load that was crushing
the heart and brain of him--and that would, unless relieved, destroy
all of the man’s native capacity to handle his tangled affairs, even
under the most unfavorable circumstances.

I decided to watch Swiftwater very closely. I noticed that he was not
to be seen around town in his usual haunts. I did not dare ask him if
he feared arrest, for that would show that I knew that his crisis had
come.

Two hours after the Yukoner’s mail was in the postoffice, Swiftwater
came to my room.

“There is no letter from Joe,” was all he said.

I made no reply except to say:

“Have you told Bera?”

“No, and I’m not going to--now,” said Swiftwater and then left the room.

Swiftwater had between $35,000 and $40,000 of my money in his Quartz
Creek concession. I had felt absolutely secure for the reason that if
the property was well handled my interest should be worth from $100,000
to $250,000. My faith in the property has been justified by subsequent
events, as all well informed Dawson mining men will testify.

But the want of money was bitter and keen at that moment. Yet I
scarcely knew what to advise Swiftwater to do.

Gates and Bera came to my rooms after dinner that night.

“Will this help you pay a few pressing little bills?” asked Swiftwater,
as he threw two fifty dollar paper notes in my lap.

“My God, Swiftwater, can’t you spare any more than $100?” I gasped.

“Oh, that’s just for now--I’ll give you plenty more tomorrow,” said he.

As they arose to go, Bera kissed me on the mouth and cheek with her
arms around my neck.

“You love the baby, don’t you mama?” said Bera, and I saw then, without
seeing, and came afterwards to know that there were tears in Bera’s
eyes and a smile dewy with affection on her lips.

Swiftwater put his arm around me and kissed me on the forehead.

“We’ll be over early for you for breakfast tomorrow,” said Swiftwater
as they went down the stairs.

Holding the baby in my arms at the window, I watched Swiftwater and
Bera go down the street, Bera turning now and again to wave her hand
and throw a kiss to me, Swiftwater lifting his hat.

Now, what I am about to relate may seem almost incredible to any
normal human mind and heart; and especially so to those thousands of
Alaskans who knew Swiftwater in the early days to be jolly, though
impractical, yet always generous, whole-souled, brave and honest.

An hour after Swiftwater and Bera had gone, there was a knock at my
door. I opened it and there stood Phil Wilson--an old associate and
friend of Swiftwater’s.

“Is Bill Gates here?” asked Wilson.

“Why, no,” said I. “They went over an hour ago.”

“Thank you,” said he, and lumbered heavily down the stairs.

The next morning I waited until 11 o’clock for Swiftwater and Bera to
come for me to go to breakfast. I had slept little or none the night
before and my nerves were worn down to the fine edge that comes just
before a total collapse.

When it seemed as if I could not wait longer, there came a knock at the
door.

When I opened the door there stood George Taylor, a friend of
Swiftwater’s of some years’ standing.

“Mrs. Beebe, I came to tell you that Swiftwater and Bera left early
this morning to go to Quartz Creek on horseback. I promised Swiftwater
I would help you move to his cabin and get everything ready for their
return on Saturday.”

“In Heaven’s name, what is Swiftwater trying to do--kill Bera?” I
exclaimed. “That ride to Quartz Creek in her condition, through the mud
and mire of that trail, will kill her.”

Taylor merely looked at me and did not answer.

“Are you telling me the truth?” I demanded.

“I am,” he said.

Taylor walked away and I closed the door and went back to the baby.

“Baby,” said I, “I guess we’re left all alone for a while and you
haven’t any mama but me.”

Although I afterward learned of the fact, it did me no good at that
trying moment that Swiftwater had told Bera, before she would consent
to leave me, that he had sent me $800 in currency by Wilson. Of course,
Swiftwater did nothing of the kind, yet his story was such as to lead
Bera to believe that I was well protected and comfortable.

Then I set to work to move my little belongings into Swiftwater’s
cabin, there to wait for four days hoping that every minute would bring
some word from Bera and Gates. There was little to eat in the cabin and
the $100 that Swiftwater had given me had nearly all gone for baby’s
necessities. The little fellow had kept up well and strong in spite of
everything, and when I undressed him at night and bathed him and got
him ready for his bed, he seemed so brave and strong and sweet that I
could not, for the life of me, give way to the feeling of desolation
and loss that my circumstances warranted.

On the third day after Bera and Swiftwater had gone and I was getting
a little supper for the baby and myself in the cabin, there came a
clatter of heavy boots on the gravel walk in front of the house and a
boisterous knock on the door.

Jumping up from the kitchen table, I nearly ran to the door, believing
that Bera and Swiftwater were there. Instead there stood a messenger
from the McDonald Hotel in Dawson with a letter for me. It simply said:

 “We have gone down the river in a small boat to Nome with Mr. Wilson. I
 will send you money immediately on arrival there, so that you can join
 us.

  SWIFTWATER.”

That was all.

I read the letter through again and then the horror of it came over
me--I all alone in Dawson with Swiftwater’s four weeks’ old baby, broke
and he owing me nearly $40,000.

Then everything seemed to leave me and I fell to the floor
unconscious. Hours afterward--they said it was 9 o’clock at night, and
the messenger had been there at 4 in the afternoon--I came to. The baby
was crying and hungry. It seemed to me I had been in a long sickness
and I could not for a while quite realize where I was or what ill shape
of a hostile fate had befallen me. And, when I think of it now, it
seems to me any other woman in my place would have gone crazy.

For two months I stayed in that cabin, trying my best to find a way out
of Dawson and unable to move a rod because of the fact that I had no
money. Swiftwater, as I learned afterwards, took a lay on a claim on
Dexter Creek and cleaned up in a short time $4,000.

When I heard this, I wrote to him for money for the baby, but none came.

A month passed and then another and no word from Swiftwater. I felt as
long as I had a roof over my head, I could make a living for myself and
the baby by working at anything--manicuring, hairdressing or sewing.
Then, one evening, just after I had finished dinner, came a rap at the
door.

It was Phil Wilson.

“Swiftwater has given me a deed to this house and power of attorney
over his other matters,” said he. “I shall move my things over here and
occupy one of these three rooms.”

I knew better than to make any objection then, but the next day I told
Wilson:

“You will have to take your things down town--you cannot stay here.”

“I guess I’ll stay all right, Mrs. Beebe,” said he. “And it will be
all winter, too. And, I think it would be better for you, Mrs. Beebe,
if you stayed here with me.”

I knew just what that meant. I said:

“Mr. Wilson, I understand you, but you will go and take your things
now.”

Wilson left in another minute and I did not see him for two days. On
the second afternoon I locked the door with a padlock and went down
town to do some shopping for the baby, who I had left with a neighbor.
I also wanted to send a fourth letter to Swiftwater, begging him to
send me some money to keep me and his baby from starving.

When I got back at dusk that evening, the door to the cabin was broken
open, and the chain and padlock lay on the ground shattered into
fragments.

I went inside. All my clothes, the baby’s and even the little personal
belongings of the child were piled together in a disordered heap in the
center room.




CHAPTER IX.


IT WAS pitch dark when I left the cabin and made my way directly, as
best I could, to the town with its dimly lighted streets. It seemed
to me that I had never had a friend in all this world. Friend? Yes,
FRIEND. That is to say--a human being who could be depended upon in any
emergency and who was right--right all the time in fair as well as in
foul weather.

There was only one thought in my mind--that was to find some man or
woman in all that country to whom I could go for shelter and for
aid. I knew naught of Swiftwater and Bera, except that they had left
me. Swiftwater’s child, I felt as if he was my own--that little babe
smiling up into my face as I had held him in my arms but a few minutes
before, seemed to me as if he was my own.

I knew instinctively that there was none in all that multitude of
carefree or careworn miners who thronged the three cafes and the dance
halls of Dawson who could do much, if anything, to help me.

Past the dance halls and saloons and gambling halls of Dawson I went
my way, down beyond the town and finally found the dark trail that led
to the barracks of the mounted police. I told the captain exactly what
had happened. I said:

“Captain, I am left all alone here by Swiftwater Bill and I have to
find some place to shelter his little two months’ old child and to feed
and clothe him. He told me to live in his cabin. But I have no home
there now as long as that man Wilson lives there.”

No woman who has never known the hard and seamy side of life in Dawson
can possibly understand how good are the mounted police to every human
being, man, woman or child, who is in trouble without fault of their
own. The captain said.

“Mrs. Beebe, I have long known of you, and I do not doubt that a wrong
has been done you. You and your little grandson shall not suffer for
want of shelter or food tonight.”

With that the captain detailed two officers with instructions to
accompany me to Swiftwater’s cabin and to see that I was comfortably
and safely housed there, no matter what the circumstances. We went
back that long, dark way, a mile over the trail to the cabin. When we
arrived there, the two officers went inside.

“Place this woman’s clothes and belongings where they were before you
came in here, and do it at once,” commanded one of the mounted police.

Wilson looked at me in amazement, and then his face was flushed with an
angry glow as he saw that the two officers meant business.

Without a word, he picked up all the baby’s clothes and my own and put
them back where they had been before. Then he took his pack of clothes
and belongings and left without a word.

It would merely encumber my story to tell how I was summoned into
court by Phil Wilson, and how the judge, after hearing my story of
Swiftwater’s brutality--of his leaving me in Dawson penniless with his
baby--said that he could hardly conceive how a man could be so inhuman
as Swiftwater was, to leave the unprotected mother of his wife and
his baby alone in such a place as Dawson and in such hands as those
of the man who stood before him. He said that such brutality, in his
judgment, was without parallel in Dawson’s annals and that, while he
felt the deepest sympathy for me, left as I had been helpless and with
Swiftwater’s baby, yet the law gave Phil Wilson the right to the cabin.

This ended the case. I turned to go from the courtroom when the
Presbyterian minister, Dr. McKenzie, came to me and said:

“Mrs. Beebe, I do not know anything about the circumstances that have
brought you to this condition, but if you will let me have the child I
will see that he has a good home and is well cared for.”

But this was not necessary, as it turned out afterwards, because Dr.
McKenzie took the matter up with the council, where it was threshed out
in all its details. The council voted $125 a month for sustenance for
the nurse and the baby. The mounted police took me to the barracks and
there provided a cabin and food, with regular supplies of provisions
from the canteen.

I do not doubt but that the monthly expense during the winter that I
lived there with the baby is still a matter of record in Dawson in the
archives of the government, and I am equally certain that, although
Swiftwater Bill has made hundreds of thousands of dollars since that
day and is now reputed to be worth close to $1,000,000, he has never
liquidated the debt he owes to the Canadian government for the care and
sustenance and shelter they gave his own boy. All of the facts stated
in this chapter can easily be verified by recourse to the records of
the court and mounted police in Dawson.

Although I knew that Swiftwater was making money in Nome, I placed no
more dependence in him from that moment and managed to sustain myself
by manicuring and hairdressing in Dawson.

The winter wore away, and there was the usual annual celebration of
the coming of spring with its steamers from White Horse laden with
the first papers and the mail from the outside. In May of that year I
received a telegram from Swiftwater Bill telling me to leave Dawson on
the first boat and come down the river to Nome, as he and Bera would
be there on the first boat from Seattle. The day after I received the
telegram the mail came and brought a letter written by Swiftwater from
Chicago, saying that he had the money to pay me all he owed me and more
too, and for me not to fail to meet him and Bera in Nome.

Isn’t it curious how a woman will forget all the injustice she suffers
at the hands of a man, when it seems to her that he is trying to do and
is doing the right thing?

Does it seem odd to you, my woman reader, that the thought of meeting
Bera again and of giving to her and to Swiftwater the custody of the
dear little child I had loved and nursed all winter long, should have
appealed to me?

And now, as there must be an end to the hardest luck story--just
as there is a finish at some time to all forms of human grief and
sorrow--so there came an end to that winter in the little cabin near
the mounted police barracks at Dawson, where baby and I and the nurse,
Lena Hubbell, had spent so many weeks waiting for a change in our luck.

Again there was a mob of every kind of people in Dawson.

On the first steamer leaving Dawson I went with the child, after giving
up a good business that netted me between $200 and $300 a month. I took
the nurse girl with me--who had been in unfortunate circumstances in
Dawson--and I speak of her now, as she figures prominently in another
chapter in this book.

It matters little now that Swiftwater could have provided handsomely
for me and the child--that he took the money that he made from his lay
on Dexter Creek and spent it gambling at Nome; and that Bera, knowing
my circumstances, took from a sluice box on his claim enough gold to
exchange for $500 in bills at Nome, to send to me.

And when I think of this my blood boils, for Bera, after she had the
$500 in bills wrapped in a piece of paper and sealed up in an envelope
addressed to me, met Swiftwater on the street in Nome and he took the
money away from her, saying:

“Bera, I’ll mail that letter to your mother.”

Of course, I never got the money because Swiftwater gambled it away,
and I laying awake nights crying and unable to sleep because of my
worry, and working hard throughout the long winter days to support
Swiftwater’s child.

So it came about that we boarded the big river steamer Susie for Nome.
Her decks were jammed with people eager to get outside or anxious to
try their fortunes in the new Seward Peninsula gold fields or the beach
diggings at Nome. The Yukon was clear of ice, wide, deep and beautiful
to look upon in summer, though in winter, when the ice is packed up one
hundred feet high, it carries the death dealing blizzards that bring an
untimely fate to many a hardy traveler.

In Nome I found no further news of Swiftwater nor Bera and waited there
for three weeks. Then, after days of watching at the postoffice, I got
a letter from Swiftwater, saying that it would not be possible for him
to come to Nome, and there was not even so much as a dollar bill in the
letter.

Disheartened and miserable, I turned to go back to my hotel. As I
turned from the postoffice a news-boy rushed up from the wharf, crying
out:

“SEATTLE TIMES--ALL ABOUT SWIFTWATER BILL RUNNING AWAY WITH ANOTHER
WOMAN.”




CHAPTER X.


AS I write this chapter, which is to interest not only the friends
and acquaintances of Swiftwater Bill, but which also may throw a new
light on his character, and may even arouse a general interest in the
odd freaks of human nature which one finds in the northern country,
I am moved to wonder whether or not there is a human pen capable of
portraying all of the many-sided phases of Swiftwater’s nature. The
story in the Seattle paper merely gave an outline of Swiftwater’s
escapade, when he ran away with Kitty Brandon, took her from Portland
to Seattle and back to Chehalis and there married her on June 20th,
1901.

If Swiftwater Bill’s title as the Don Juan of the Klondike had ever
been questioned before this affair, it seems to me that his elopement
with Kitty Brandon from Portland early in June of that year would have
forever settled the matter in his favor. The Seattle paper merely told
that Swiftwater and Kitty had been married, against the will and wish
of her mother at Chehalis, and that the girl’s mother learning of the
affair had followed the lovers to Seattle.

Kitty was a fragile, neatly formed girl of fifteen years, when she
went to St. Helen’s Hall in Portland as a student. Swiftwater left Bera
in the spring of that year at Washington, D. C., and hurried across
the continent, intending, as he told me in all his letters, on making
another fortune in Alaska. He had valuable interests in the gold mining
district near Teller, Alaska, and in his fond imagination there was
every reason to believe that the Kougarok country was as rich, if not
richer, than Eldorado and Bonanza in the Klondike.

“Bring my baby down to Nome and meet me at Teller,” Swiftwater wrote
me. “I am so glad you have taken such good care of my darling son all
winter in Dawson. I shall pay you all that you have loaned me and I
will see that you make more money in Teller City than you ever made in
Dawson. I could hug and kiss you for taking such good care of our baby
boy.”

Such was the language of Swiftwater’s letters to me, written in
Washington in the spring of that year. Swiftwater reasoned that all of
Alaska is underlaid with gold; that the fabulous riches of Eldorado and
Bonanza would be duplicated again and again on Seward peninsula. To
his mind, the making of a fortune of a million of dollars in a summer
in the new diggings near Teller was one of the simplest things in the
world, and it is not to be wondered at that there were hundreds among
his friends who believed then and do now that his mining judgment and
fairy-like luck were such as to enable him to go forth into the north
at any time and bring out hundreds of thousands of dollars in the
precious yellow stuff.

Be that as it may, when Swiftwater reached the coast, he happened by
ill chance to stop at Portland. In St. Helen’s Hall there was Kitty
Brandon, known as his niece, a girl of more than ordinary mental and
physical charms. Once again the amorous nature of Swiftwater Bill
asserted itself. It is related that he called at St. Helen’s Hall and
interviewed Kitty Brandon, and then after that was a frequent visitor,
taking Kitty at odd times driving through the beautiful city of
Portland or entertaining her at lunch or dinner, as the case might be,
in Portland’s swell cafes.

That Swiftwater had no plans for his immediate future can well be
believed when it is known that after a few days of courtship of Kitty
Brandon, he eloped with the little girl and came to Seattle. On the way
to Seattle Kitty and Swiftwater were married at Chehalis.

It is not surprising that Swiftwater found his last love affair
anything but a summer holiday, when it is remembered that his
legal wife, Bera, was in Washington, D. C., awaiting his return.
Considerations of propriety and, even of the law, seemed to have
left Swiftwater’s mind entirely, until Kitty’s mother learned of his
elopement and followed the loving pair to Seattle.

What followed afterwards was told in the Seattle, Tacoma and Portland
newspapers of that time. Learning that Swiftwater and Kitty were
registered as man and wife at a Seattle hotel, Kitty’s mother followed
them and sought to apprehend them. Then it was that Swiftwater evinced
that capacity for resource and tact which, as all his friends know, is
one of his most distinguished characteristics.

With the irate mother of his newest love lying in wait at night in
the lobby of one of Seattle’s best known hotels, it was Swiftwater’s
task to show that skill in maneuver and celerity in action which tens
of thousands of Northerners attributed to him as the origin of his
odd nickname. There was no time to repent for his infatuation for the
pretty Kitty Brandon, or to remember the fate of his deserted wife and
child in Washington.

And Swiftwater was equal to the emergency. Bidding Kitty’s mother wait
in the hotel parlor, Swiftwater rushed to his room, telephoned for a
hack to come to the rear of the hostelry, and in less than ten minutes
Bill and his sweetheart were being driven at breakneck speed through
the streets of Seattle, southward over the bridge across the tide
flats, headed for Tacoma. It was told by Swiftwater afterwards that in
nearly every mile of that trip fear that Kitty’s mother was pursuing
him and his inamorita followed him and for the greater part of the way
he kept watching down the dark road in the rear of his hack, expecting
that at every turn of the road the wrathful parent would be in sight in
readiness to pounce upon him.

[Illustration: ESCAPE AT NIGHT OF SWIFTWATER AND KITTY BRANDON FROM
THE GIRL’S IRATE MOTHER.]

From Tacoma, where Swiftwater and Kitty found only temporary shelter,
the runaway pair escaped to Portland, to return to Seattle and spend
their honeymoon in a little cottage in an obscure district near
Interbay.




CHAPTER XI.


AS I look back on that day in Nome and recall the sensation created
in the little mining camp when the paper containing the story of
Swiftwater’s perfidy was circulated abroad among the people, I am
tempted to wonder if the duplicate or parallel of Swiftwater’s
enormities at this time can be found in all the annals of this great
Northwestern country. The Times’ story seemed, even to those like
myself, who knew something of Swiftwater’s character, to be almost
incredible, and for my part it was several hours before I realized, in
a dumb unfeeling sort of a way, that Swiftwater had absolutely stolen
his own sister’s child--Kitty Brandon--a girl not more than sixteen
years old, had eloped with her, committed bigamy by marrying her in
Chehalis, Wash., and at the same time had deserted his wife and left
her penniless in Washington, D. C.

It was long after nightfall as I sat in my room, the baby sound asleep
in his little crib, the nurse gone for the night, and I had read The
Times’ story about Swiftwater and Kitty over the twentieth time, that I
felt the real force of the shame and scandal which the miner had placed
about himself and Bera, and which did not even leave me and my little
grandson, Clifford, outside of its dark and forbidding pall.

All that night I lay awake and wondered how in Heaven’s name I could
get word to Bera--or if she had received a telegram from friends in
Seattle and the blow had killed her--or whether she was then on her way
West, or whatever fate had befallen her.

I knew little about Swiftwater’s business affairs just at that time
except that he had gone to Washington in the hope of furthering his
mining ventures in the North and had taken Bera with him. Then I
remembered that in his letters to me and telegrams urging me to join
him at Nome he had spoken about having raised considerable money and
was able to pay his debt to me and lift me out of the mire of toil and
drudgery in Alaska, in which I had sojourned for so many months.

All that night I neither slept nor rested. It seemed to me at times
as if my head would split into a thousand pieces with the thought
of Swiftwater’s treachery to Bera and myself. Then I realized the
utter futility and helplessness of a woman situated as I was in Nome,
absolutely unable to get a telegram or quick letter to Bera or to hear
from her telling me of her condition. For aught I knew, she might
have been deathly sick, cared for only by strangers or left destitute
at some place in the East and without any means whatever of righting
herself.

It seems to me, now when I think of that all night’s vigil in the
little hotel in Nome, that Providence must have been watching over me,
that I did not lose my reason. At last I found that unless I went to
work doing something, I would sure go crazy, and then I started to get
work, first borrowing some money, which I sent out by mail the next day
to Bera at her last address.

While I worked and slaved in Nome trying to get a few dollars ahead
so that I could care for the baby and make my way out to Seattle to
help Bera, I finally got word that she had been left destitute in
Washington, D. C. Swiftwater had furnished four nice rooms in an
apartment house at Washington, and in their effects was more than
$1,000 worth of rare curios and ivory from Alaska. Then came another
letter that Bera, unable to pay for her care, food and medical
attention--the second baby boy was born August 28th--had been put on
board a train with a charity ticket, her ivories and curios sold for a
trifle and had been started West for Seattle.

I need not dwell on how Bera, more dead than alive from five days
traveling in a chair car from Washington to Seattle with her babe at
her bosom and unable to sleep at all--with nothing to eat but a few
sandwiches which they had given her at Washington--arrived in Seattle
and was cared for by friends.

They took the girl, so weak she could hardly stand on her feet, to
a restaurant and gave her her first hot meal in almost a week. Then
Bera and her baby went to Portland to live with her grandma, while
Swiftwater and Kitty Gates were touring the country.

And do you know that Swiftwater’s polygamous wife, Kitty Gates, was
the girl who Bera one year before had fitted out with a nice outfit of
clothes and had sent her to a convent school at Portland to be given a
good education?

Yes, this is the truth, and this was Kitty’s gratitude to Bera and
Swiftwater’s crime against the law and his own flesh and blood.

How we managed after I came to Seattle from Nome to live in a little
room in a small old fashioned house on Fourth Avenue with barely enough
to eat and scarcely enough clothes to cover ourselves need not be told
here in detail. I sometimes wonder whether or not I have overladen
my little narrative with grief and misery and crime against humanity
and against human laws, as well as God’s. And then I wonder still
more why it was that there were men in Seattle, in San Francisco and
in Fairbanks in those days who were always ready to exalt Swiftwater
and do him honor and take him by the hand, while the world would look
askance at Bera Gates, his wife, whom he had so grieviously wronged.




CHAPTER XII.


“SWIFTWATER BILL GATES is back.”

One morning in Seattle months after Bera and I had set up a little
housekeeping establishment in Seattle, I picked up the Saturday evening
edition of The Times and almost dropped over in my chair when I saw
headlines in the paper as shown in the foregoing.

What had been Swiftwater Bill’s fortune in all those months, I knew
not, but the fact as stated in the paper that he had returned from
Alaska was sufficient for me.

Bera said: “Mama, I don’t know any reason why you should fuss around
about Swiftwater.”

“Never mind me,” said I, “I’ll find him, my dear, just to see what he
has to say for himself.”

Down to the Hotel Northern, then the Butler, the Rainier-Grand and the
Stevens and all the rest I went and searched the registers without
avail. As I remember now, it took me the greater part of a day to cover
all the ground.

Finally, by a curious chance I located Swiftwater at the Victoria
Hotel. I waited until the next morning and then went to the Victoria
and asked for Gates.

Swiftwater, the clerk said, was out--had not been seen but once since
his arrival.

I am not going to say whether or not it was the humor of the situation
or the bitter resentment I bore toward him that led me to tramp up
three flights of stairs to the little parlor on the landing close to
Swiftwater’s room, and to wait there ten hours at a stretch--until 1:10
in the morning. Then I went home, only to return at 8 o’clock the next
day.

“Mr. Gates is in his room, but he is asleep,” said the clerk.

“I am Mrs. Beebe, his mother-in-law, and I want to see him now and I
shall go direct to his room. You can go with me if you desire,” said I.
The little clerk scanned me carefully and then said, “Very well.” We
went upstairs together.

The clerk rapped on the door twice. There was no answer.

“I guess he’s out,” said the boy.

“Knock again--good and loud,” I commanded.

The boy rapped and just then the door opened a tiny way--about an inch,
I guess, but through that little crack I saw the eye and part of the
curling black moustache of Swiftwater Bill.

Then I threw myself against the door and walked in.

[Illustration: “COME OUT OF THAT, BILL! I HAVEN’T GOT A GUN.”]

I wish I could tell you how funny was Swiftwater’s apparition, as, clad
only in his white night robe, he jumped into bed, pulling the covers
over his head.

This was the first time that Swiftwater had seen me since he left me in
Dawson alone and unprotected, to find means as best I could to provide
shelter and sustenance for his little baby boy, Clifford.

In spite of myself, I laughed, forgetting all of the long months that
we had waited for some sign of Swiftwater and an indication of his
desire to do what was right by his own two little babies.

“Coward,” I said, still laughing. “You know you deserve to be shot.”

No answer from Swiftwater, whose body was completely covered up by bed
clothes.

Now, most men and most women will admire a MAN, but a cur and a coward
are universally despised.

As I looked at that huddled up mass of humanity underneath the white
bedspread, my heart rose in rage. The contempt I felt for him is beyond
all expression.

“Come out of that, Bill,” said I. “I have no gun!”

After a while, Swiftwater poked his head from beneath the bed clothes
and showed a blanched face covered with a three weeks’ old growth of
black beard. I told him to dress and I would wait outside. In a few
minutes Swiftwater emerged and there stood a man who had commanded
hundreds of thousands of dollars in money and gold in Alaska, looking
just exactly as if he had dropped from the brake-beam of a Northern
Pacific freight train and had walked his way into Seattle. He was clad
in a dirty sack coat, that shone like a mirror, with brown striped
trousers, an old brown derby hat and shoes that were out at the sole
and side.

“Mrs. Beebe,” said Swiftwater in a trembling voice, “I am all in. If
you will not have me arrested, but will give me a chance, I’ll soon
provide for the babies and Bera.”

Swiftwater pleaded as if for his life. He said that he could get money
in San Francisco from a man who had offered to back him in a new scheme
in the Tanana country.

There was I with the two little boys and Bera all on my hands. I told
Swiftwater that I would do nothing for him, but that I would forego
having him put behind steel bars until I had made up my mind just what
course I should take.

The next night, there was a knock at our door about 3 o’clock in the
morning. Bera slept in the front room of our little two-room apartment
and I in the other with the babies. I went to the door--there stood
Swiftwater.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he said, “I have no place to sleep tonight. If you will
let me lie down on the floor, so that I can get a little sleep, I will
get up early tomorrow morning and not bother you.”

I told Bera to come into my room and I let Swiftwater into the kitchen,
where I gave him a comforter on which to lie. The next morning, after
Bera had gone, I prepared Swiftwater’s breakfast. The man was in rags,
almost. I made him take a bath, while I washed his underclothes, and
then I went out and bought him a new pair of socks and gave him money
with which to buy a new hat.

The next day Swiftwater went to San Francisco on money I furnished him
after I had pawned my diamonds with one of the best jewelry houses in
Seattle.

Why? Well, because Swiftwater had made me believe that he had another
chance in the Tanana and that his friends in San Francisco, having
faith in his judgment as a miner--whatever may be said of Swiftwater,
he was known throughout the North as an expert miner--had raised a
large sum with which to grubstake him.

I will say this for Swiftwater: that he gave me a contract providing
that he should pay what he owed me and give me an interest in such
mines as he would locate in the Tanana country. And then he went away.




CHAPTER XIII.


SOMETIMES, when I recall the stirring events in Swiftwater Bill’s
career, following the time he used the money I raised by pawning my
diamonds and then went to California, I am tempted to wonder whether
or not a man of his type of mental makeup ever realized that the hard
bumps that he gets along the corduroy road of adversity are one and all
of his own making. For, if one will but pause a moment and analyze the
events in Swiftwater Bill’s melodramatic career, the inevitable result
comes to him, namely, that the bumps over which Swiftwater traveled
during all of those years, when, one day he was worth a half million
dollars in gold, and the next was hiding in all manner of dark and
subterranean recesses in order to avoid deputy sheriffs and constables
with writs and court processes, were placed there by his own hands and
as skilfully and effectively as if he had deliberately planned to cause
himself misery.

Swiftwater’s transformation from a broken down tramp of the Weary
Willie order to a fine gentleman and prosperous business man, with new
tailor made clothes, patent leather shoes and his favored silk tile,
was rapid after he got his hands on the money I borrowed from the
jewelers, with my diamonds as the pledge. The change in Swiftwater was
simply marvelous. The day before almost, Swiftwater had stood before
me, as I have told, without collar or tie, a dirty black growth of
beard nearly an inch long on his unshaven chin and cheek, a dark frock
coat of a nondescript shape that had seen better days and hung on
Bill’s frame as though it might have been loaned to him by some friend;
a pair of trousers of mediocre workmanship and his feet almost sticking
out of his shoes.

Then picture Swiftwater ready to board the steamer for San Francisco,
where his friend Marks was waiting to grubstake him to the tune of
$18,000, jauntily wearing his polished beaver on the side of his head,
his black moustaches curled and waving in the breezes, his chin as
smooth and immaculate as an ivory billiard ball and his air and manner
that of a man who had absolute confidence in himself and his future.

It is no wonder then, that when Swiftwater reached San Francisco
outfitted as I have described, he found plenty of men, who, charmed
by the magic of his description of the golden lure of the North and
hypnotized into a state of enthusiasm by the halo of romance and river
beds lined with gold attached to Swiftwater’s name, were willing to
back him heavily for another venture in the North.

By this time the Tanana District was becoming famous throughout the
world and the town of Fairbanks had been located and Cleary had brought
forth from the stream that bears his name thousands of dollars of
virgin gold, thus proving beyond question the richness of the country.

Now, I am ready to believe that most people will agree with me that
Swiftwater was about as rapid and agile a performer as any of his
contemporaries who occupy the hall of fame in the annals of Alaska.
Because it was only a few short weeks until Swiftwater returns to
Seattle with his pockets bulging with currency and prepared to leave
for Fairbanks.

Of course, I knew nothing of Swiftwater’s presence in Seattle, though
it had been only a few short weeks since I had, with my own hands, in
the kitchen in the little two-room apartment we occupied, washed his
only suit of underclothes, so that he could go on the street without
being annoyed by the police.

The first I knew of Swiftwater’s return from San Francisco was when
I read in the morning paper that “W. C. Gates, the well known and
opulent Alaska miner,” had entertained a distinguished party of Seattle
business men at a banquet at one of the big down town hotels. The cost
of that feed, as I afterwards learned, was about $100--of Mr. Marks’
money. Be that as it may, before I could find Swiftwater and gently
recall to him the fact that his wife and two little children were
almost in absolute want in Seattle he had managed to board a steamer
for the Tanana and was off for the North.

Now, when I found that Swiftwater had gone, I was frantic with the
desire to follow him up to Alaska. For the year and a half that I had
remained in Seattle, waiting like Micawber for something to turn up,
the fever to get back to Alaska seemed to be growing in my veins at a
rate that meant that something had to be done. For, after Alaska has
once laid her spell over a man or woman, in nine times out of ten, she
will claim him or her from that time onward to the end of life as her
devoted and always loyal slave. I know not, nor have I ever found any
who did know, what it is that makes one who has ever lived in Alaska,
and who has left there, unhappy and discontented until they go back
once more to the land of gold.

I have seen and talked with old “sourdoughs,” trappers and dog
team freighters, and they all tell the same story. When the first
big clean-up had been made in Dawson, I remember well, the winter
following found a mob of big, boisterous, pleasure loving, money
spending, carefree and happy hearted Klondike miners in the hotels of
Seattle, San Francisco and New York. They lived on nothing but the
choicest steaks and the richest wines, and the sight of a plate of
beans would start a fight. Then they would all come back to Seattle in
the spring, sick, feverish, unhappy, with a look in their eyes like
that of a mother hungering for her lost babe. In Seattle they would
spend a restless week, but when they struck the trail at White Horse
just before the spring breakup in the Yukon every man jack of them was
himself again--jolly, joyous, carefree, full voiced and filled with the
enthusiasm of a two-year-old.

Why, I have known more than one broad shouldered giant of the trail
grow as sick and puny as a singed kitten while waiting in Seattle for
his boat to take him, late in February or early in March, to Skagway. I
knew one miner, who in health was six feet five inches tall, weighing
two hundred and forty pounds without an ounce of fat on him, come
within an ace of dying with quick consumption, which it afterwards
proved was due to his longing for the biting wind that blows from the
top of Alaska’s Coast Range and bears company with the wayfarer down in
the valley of the Yukon past the lakes and into the gold camps of the
Klondike.

Well, all this came to me then as I realized that Swiftwater was
gone North once more in search of gold, but, with Bera in Seattle and
the two babies, I was shackled as securely as any one of the wretches
who walk the streets of this city with chains and ball working out a
sentence for vagrancy.

It is not a less remarkable thing to be told of Swiftwater that he
turned Dame Fortune’s wheel once more with the dial pointing in
his direction as quickly as he had raised the necessary money in
San Francisco to make a new start in Fairbanks. To all who know of
Swiftwater’s kaleidoscopic changes from rich to poor, and back again to
rich, it seems as if the fickle Dame, carrying a magic horn spilling
gold in all directions, followed Swiftwater wherever he went into
Alaska and out again, down to the cities of the States and back again,
and, if she seemed to lose him for a while, always to welcome him back
with a winning smile.

Of course, it is part of my story that after Swiftwater had amassed
another fortune on Cleary Creek, in the Tanana, and his friend, Mr.
Marks, who had grubstake him, sought to obtain his rights in the
property, it was found that the contract between them written by
Swiftwater was as full of holes as a sieve. Again the lawyers went to
work earning big fees in the litigation which Marks brought to compel
Swiftwater to do the honorable thing--to do that by him which any man
in Alaska, at least while he lived there, never failed to do--to divide
with the man who grubstaked him.

Now, Swiftwater, as my reader has by this time safely guessed, was
made in a different mould. They used to say in the early days when the
stories of the incredible richness of Eldorado’s gold lined bedrock
were told on the “outside,” that when a man in Alaska drank the water
of the country, the truth left him. I have never, for my own part,
fully determined whether this is true, and I may frankly say that in
some of my experiences, the opportunities for judging of the truth or
falsity of this theory were limited, the reason being that most of the
men drink something beside water in that country.

As for Swiftwater Bill, he never did drink anything but water--I never
knew him to take a drop of any intoxicating liquors or wine--so that
if the water of Alaska had any demoralizing effect on Swiftwater, it
must have been in the direction of his sense of business honor and
integrity and a decent sense of his obligations as a husband and a
father. And I am satisfied, too, that the water of Alaska, if such was
the demoralizing agent in Swiftwater’s case, certainly worked terrific
havoc.

[Illustration: SWIFTWATER BILL GATES, FREDDIE GATES AT RIGHT, AND
CLIFFORD GATES, AT BOTTOM.]




CHAPTER XIV.


SWIFTWATER BILL had struck it again.

On Number 6 Cleary Creek, in the Tanana, the man who gained his
chiefest fame in the early days of Dawson by walking around the rapids
of Miles Canyon, because he was afraid to navigate them, thereby
earning his cognomen, “Swiftwater Bill,” had found another fortune in
the yellow gold that lines countless tens of thousands of little creeks
and dry gulches in that great northern country--Alaska.

Swiftwater had obtained a big working interest in the mine on Cleary
Creek, a stream that has produced its millions in yellow gold. And,
after the first discovery of placer gold in paying quantities in the
Tanana, the whole Western coast of the American continent knew the
story. Like Dawson, the town of Fairbanks quickly sprang from the soil
as if reared by the magic of some unseen genii of the Arabian Nights.

Of course, the word came out to me in a letter from a friend at
Fairbanks. And I sometimes think that, after all, I must have had a
great many friends in Alaska who remembered the hard task that the
fates had put upon me when they made me, through no wish of my own, the
mother-in-law of Swiftwater Bill.

As I remember now, the news that Swiftwater had struck another
pay streak impressed upon me the necessity of immediate action.
Swiftwater’s previous conduct, particularly that $100 dinner that he
gave in Seattle a few months before, had taught me one thing, and that
was that if Gates was ever to do the square thing by me and by Bera and
the babies it would be only when some one with sufficient will power to
accomplish the task would reach him and see that he did not forget his
duty.

Now, it is no May day holiday for a woman to “mush” over the ice
from the coast of Alaska to the interior mining camps. First you have
to get an outfit in Seattle, and by that I mean sufficient heavy
underclothing, outer clothing, heavy boots, furs and sleeping bag and
the like to make travel over the ice comfortable. Ten years ago any
woman who made that journey--that is, from Dyea over the mountain
passes covered with glaciers and thence down the Upper Yukon on the
ice--was considered almost as a heroine and the newspapers were eager
to print the stories of such exploits. When I determined to go into
the Tanana to find Swiftwater mining gold on Number 6 Cleary there
were few, if any, of the comforts of present-day winter travel on the
Valdez-Fairbanks trail, such as horse stages and frequent road-houses.

Consequently, I determined to follow the old route, and I went to
Skagway, thence over the White Pass road to White Horse and, crossing
Lake Le Barge on the ice, there to await the departure for Dawson of
the first down river steamer.

It was in the early spring of the year--that is, early for Alaska,
although when I left Seattle the orchards were in bloom and lawns
were as green as in mid-summer. Lake Le Barge was still frozen over,
and the upper waters of the Yukon were beginning to show their first
gigantic unrest of that spring--a mighty unrest that carries with it
the movement of vast ice gorges down the canyon of the Upper Yukon to
the Klondike, and which, if suddenly halted on its way to the sea by an
unexpected drop in temperature, is likely to work havoc with men and
property and sometimes human lives.

The Yukon River is not like any other stream on the American continent
with which you and I are familiar. It seems to be a thing alive when
the spring sun begins to loosen the icy chains that bind it hard and
fast to old Mother Earth through eight long and dreary winter months.
No greater phenomena of nature, showing the change that spring brings
to all forms of life--human, animal and plant--is to be found anywhere
than the awakening of the Yukon River after her voiceless sleep.

At White Horse the freight for Dawson and the Tanana mines was stacked
twenty feet high in all directions when we boarded the first steamer
and followed the ice jam down the river to Dawson. Eventually, on a
little steamer that plied between Dawson and Fairbanks when the ice is
far enough gone to make navigation safe, I made my way to the chief
mining camp of the Tanana--Fairbanks, named after the vice-president,
who visited the North when he was a senator from Indiana.

I had no trouble in finding Gates.

“Swiftwater,” I said, “I am here to have you provide for your wife and
children, and to pay at least part of what you owe me.”

Bill was courteous, suave, obliging and well mannered.

“Mrs. Beebe,” said Bill, “at last I am fixed so that I can do the right
thing by you and all others. As soon as I can make my last payment on
my Cleary Creek property, I will square everything up, and give you
plenty of money for Bera and the boys.”

Now, I know that everyone who reads this little book will say to
themselves:

“If Mrs. Beebe don’t get her money now, she certainly is foolish.”

Swiftwater, to be sure, saw that my hotel bills were paid and told me
every day that in a short time he would clean up enough gold to make
himself independent, and provide bountifully for Bera and the two
boys--and I believed him.

Swiftwater’s sister, the mother of Kitty, his polygamous wife, was, I
quickly learned, living in a tent on Bill’s claim, waiting to lay hold
of him and his money as soon as the clean-up was finished. Long before
this he had deserted Kitty, and in all the turmoil and trouble that
came after his bigamous marriage to his niece I had lost all track of
that unfortunate girl.

I remember now how odd it struck me that Swiftwater’s sister was
there, living in a little white canvas tent, and enduring the
privations which any woman must suffer in that country, while I,
actuated by the same desire, was waiting for Swiftwater to finish
washing up the dumps on his claims. And I recalled at the time that
when Swiftwater mined thousands of gold from his claims in the Klondike
he allowed his own mother to cook in a cabin of a miner on a claim
not far from his own, and although rich beyond his fondest dreams had
permitted that poor woman to earn her own living by the hardest kind of
drudgery and toil.




CHAPTER XV.


SWIFTWATER’S clean-up on Number 6 Cleary Creek was $75,000 in gold. The
summer was come to an end and there were signs on the trees, in the
crackling of the frosted grass in the early morning and in the bite
of the night wind from the mountain canyons that told of the quick
approach of winter in the Tanana. Swiftwater had been more than usually
fortunate. His mine on Number 6 Cleary had yielded far beyond his
expectations. Swiftwater had every reason to believe his friends who
told him that his luck was phenomenal.

As there are compensating advantages and disadvantages in almost every
phase of human life in this world, it may possibly be said that as an
offset to Swiftwater’s phenomenal luck, he had two women, the mothers
of his two wives, waiting patiently at Fairbanks for him to bring
out enough money to properly provide for his families. I had told
Swiftwater:

“I am up here to take good care of you, Bill, and incidentally to see
that you provide enough money to feed and clothe your children and your
wife. I don’t care anything about that other woman over there.”

Bill laughed, and said it was probably a lucky thing for him that he
had a mother-in-law to look after his welfare. But if Swiftwater’s
mind ever hovered around the idea of criminal proceedings on the score
of bigamy, he did not give voice to it. He merely went around in his
cheerful way from day to day working vigorously with his men until,
finally, early in September, the last of the pay dirt was washed from
the dumps into the sluice boxes and the gold sacked and taken to the
bank.

Then Bill began paying off his debts. He settled with his partners,
and then with a big chunk of bills and drafts in his inside pocket we
started for Seattle.

It was getting winter rapidly and we had no time to lose in order to
catch the steamship “Ohio,” at St. Michael, for Seattle, before the
winter freeze-up on Bering Sea.

Swiftwater, while working on Number 6 Cleary, had been all business
and activity. Now, he seemed on the little boat going down the Tanana
to be his old self again--by that I mean that Swiftwater reverted to
his conduct of early days, which had lead some people to believe that
he was descended from the Mormon stock back in Utah. Why Swiftwater had
never earned the title of the Brigham Young of the Klondike instead of
the Knight of the Golden Omelette or just plain Swiftwater, I never
could quite understand.

At Fairbanks Swiftwater induced a woman, whose name I shall not give at
this time, to board the steamer for the outside. A half day’s further
ride took us to Chena, and there Swiftwater met another friend by the
name of Violet--a girl who had worked as housekeeper and cook for a
crowd of miners during the summer because her husband had deserted her
and left her penniless in Fairbanks.

This Violet was young and comely, and of gentle breeding. The hard life
in the mining camps of the Yukon and the bitterness she had suffered
at the hands of her truant husband had taken a little of the natural
refinement from the girl and had probably shaped her life so that the
better side could not be seen.

Be that as it may, Violet came with Swiftwater, but, when she found on
the steamship “Ohio” that Swiftwater had tipped one of the crew $100 so
as to enable him to have a seat with a woman on each side of him at his
meals, Violet refused to have anything to do with him.

At St. Michael, when I found that Swiftwater thought more of the
association of women and of having his kind of a good time than of
providing for his wife and children, I made up my mind that there would
have to be a showdown of some kind. I telegraphed to Bera at Seattle:

“Swiftwater is coming down on the Ohio. You had better see him now, if
you want anything.”

We were nine days making the trip from St. Michael to Seattle. When the
crowd on the boat learned that Swiftwater Bill was on board, everybody
looked for fireworks and a good time. The captain ordered notice put up
in the dining room, reading:

“Gambling positively prohibited on this boat.”

Swiftwater saw that sign and gently laughed to himself.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he said, “I am going to have some fun with the boys. So
if I come to borrow some money from you, don’t be foolish and refuse
me.”

Swiftwater had some few hundred in cash, but most of his money was in
drafts, which he could not cash on the boat. When I found that the boys
had started a little poker game, I expected Swiftwater to be coming to
me for money in a little while, and sure enough he did.

“Swiftwater,” I said, “as long as you play poker you can’t have any
money from me, because you know you can’t play poker. But if you will
start a solo game I will let you have a little change.”

Now, Swiftwater swelled up visibly because he knew that I thought he
was one of the best solo players in all the North, and I have to laugh
even now to recall that after the first fifteen minutes of play at solo
the men who had sought to fleece him of his money, found they had no
chance and they all stopped the game.

It was late Saturday afternoon when finally the Ohio poked her nose in
front of one of the docks in Seattle. There was a strong ebb tide, and
it was nearly an hour before the gang plank was run ashore. We docked
jam up against a little steamer on our left, and Swiftwater, being in a
hurry to get ashore, asked me if I would take his grip in the carriage
to the Cecil Hotel and he would join me in a little while, after he
could get a shave. With that Swiftwater jumped to the deck of the
little steamer next to us and thence to the dock and was gone.

I went direct to the Cecil Hotel, where Bera was waiting for me. Before
I had been there a half hour the newsboys on the streets were crying
the sale of the Seattle Times:

“All about Swiftwater Bill arrested for bigamy.”

I heard the shrill voices of the urchins from my window in the hotel
and I said:

“Bera, what have you done--had him arrested?”

I rang the bell and told the bell-boy to bring up a copy of The
Times. Sure enough, there was the whole story of a warrant issued for
Swiftwater Bill on the charge of bigamy and a long yarn about his
various escapes in Alaska, including a recital of how he ruined the
life of young Kitty Gates, his niece, by eloping with her and marrying
her while he was still the lawful husband of Bera.

Just about dusk--I think it must have been at 8 o’clock that
evening--there came a knock at the door. I went to answer it, and there
in the hall of the hotel stood a man who was an absolute stranger to me.

“Mrs. Beebe?”

“This is Mrs. Beebe.”

“Swiftwater wants to see you. I am Jack Watson, who used to be with him
in the north.”

“Where is he?” I asked.

“I can’t tell you where he is, Mrs. Beebe,” said the man, “but if you
will go with me I can find him.”

Five minutes later we were on First Avenue, which was crowded with
thousands of sightseers, it being Saturday night, and everybody seemed
to be out for a good time. Watson led me up Spring Street to the alley
between First and Second Avenues and then went down the alley till,
reaching the shadow of a tall building, he said:

“Please wait here a minute, Mrs. Beebe.”

I looked down at the brilliantly lighted street corner on First
Avenue, where is situated the Rainier-Grand Hotel, and there I saw
Swiftwater standing, smoking a cigar, while hundreds of people were
passing up and down the sidewalk. He little looked as if the deputy
sheriffs were after him.

In a moment Watson had brought Swiftwater to me.

“Mrs. Beebe,” said Swiftwater, “what did you wire to Bera? Did you tell
her I was coming out and to have me arrested?”

“I certainly wired her,” said I, “and, Swiftwater, if she’s had you
arrested that’s your business.”

“Mrs. Beebe, you’ve been the only friend I’ve ever had and now you have
thrown me down,” said the miner.

Said I, “Swiftwater, I have not thrown you down, and it’s about time
that you showed some indication of trying to do what is right by me and
Bera and the babies.”

“Here’s that $250 I borrowed from you on the boat,” said Swiftwater,
“and I guess after all that you are really the only friend I ever had
in this world. Won’t you tell me what to do now?”

I hesitated a moment and then it seemed to me that there was little
to be gained by having Swiftwater thrown into jail without any chance
whatever to secure his release on bail. In spite of all that I had
suffered from him, and all the untold misery and humiliation that he
had put upon my daughter Bera, I felt sorry for Swiftwater.

“You had better take this $250 back,” said I, “as you may have to get
out of town tonight. Have you any other money on you?”

“Not a cent,” said he.

“Very well, you can pay me that money you owe some other time,” I said.

Then Swiftwater and I fell to talking as to what had best be done. He
wanted very much to see Bera and the babies and begged me, if I thought
it safe, to take him to the hotel. Finally, seeing the big crowd on the
streets, I consented, and together we went to the Cecil, entered the
elevator and then went directly to my rooms.

Bera was there with the boy Freddie--the youngest. Swiftwater kissed
Bera and the baby, but Bera turned away and went into another room, the
tears streaming down her face.

“Mrs. Beebe,” said Swiftwater, “the penitentiary will be my fate unless
this bigamy charge is withdrawn. You and Bera and the babies will lose
if I go to state’s prison, and that is where Kitty Gates will send me
unless Bera will get a divorce.”

Just then there came a loud rap at the door, and without waiting for
either of us to speak the door was opened and in walked two deputy
sheriffs. They immediately placed Swiftwater under arrest.




CHAPTER XVI.


AS A VERACIOUS chronicler of the events, inexplicable and unbelievable
as this story may appear, of the life and exploits of Swiftwater Bill
Gates, I want to begin this chapter with the prefatory announcement
that, all and singular, as the lawyers say, the statements herein are
absolutely true and may be verified.

I give this simple warning merely because, as I recall what happened
the next two or three days after Swiftwater’s arrest, it seems to
me that many of my readers will say, “These things could not have
happened.”

Swiftwater, calmly seating himself, in a big leather upholstered Morris
chair, said, looking at the Sheriff; “Old man, I guess we can fix this
thing up right here. Send for the judge and have him come down here
quick.”

The officer looked at me and smiled.

“I don’t want to see Mr. Gates put in jail tonight” said I. “And if
there is any way that this thing can be settled I am willing. More than
that,” and here I looked at Swiftwater, “I think Bill will not make
any attempt to escape, and if it is all right with you, I’ll go on his
bond.”

After more palaver of this kind, and here I am about to tell something
about judicial processes that will surely cause a smile, a messenger
was sent from the hotel to another hotel, where was stopping Judge
Hatch, who was sitting on the Superior Court bench in King County,
although he lived in another county down the Sound.

Outside in the hall there were a score of people, waiting to see
Swiftwater, and to learn what would be the outcome of the case. There
was the sheriff, Lou Smith; two other deputies, a half dozen lawyers
and the reporters for the Seattle newspapers--quite a colony altogether.

After half an hour the judge came in the room, accompanied by another
deputy sheriff.

“We’d just as well have some of the lawyers in here,” said Swiftwater.
“Ask Mr. Murphy and Mr. Cole to come in.”

The door was opened and in came the attorneys and some others.

“Will you please ring the bell, Mrs. Beebe?” said Swiftwater.

I rang the bell, the boy came and Swiftwater ordered two pint bottles
of wine.

Now, this was Swiftwater’s way of dallying with justice. It was
another exemplification of his idea--the mainspring in the man’s whole
character--that money could do anything and everything.

The wine came, two bottles at a time and then four, and then six.
Every time the boy came up, Swiftwater borrowed money from me to pay
the bill. Then Swiftwater did something that I never believed could
happen. The National Bank at Fairbanks had, a few weeks before, issued
its first currency--the first government bank notes in all Alaska.
Swiftwater had a bunch of the new $20 bills and, wrapping in each a
nugget taken from Number 6 Cleary, he presented one to each of his
friends--that is, all who were present.

“If Mr. Gates will deposit $2,250, as counsel for Mrs. Gates desires,
which is to be applied for the maintenance of herself and children and
for attorney’s fees, I think we may continue this matter until a later
date,” said the judge.

Swiftwater came over to me.

“I’ve got a thousand dollar draft,” said he, “and if you will loan me
$1,250 I’ll pay everything up Monday,” said Swiftwater.

I have never yet fully made up my mind what led me to loan Swiftwater
that money, unless it was that, like everyone else who knew of his
wonderful capacity for getting money rapidly out of the North, I
believed he would make good all of his promises. I gave him the money,
and Swiftwater was a free man.

Just then the sheriff himself opened the door and, noticing one of the
lawyers holding a bunch of bills and drafts in his hand, said:

“I guess I will take charge of this.”

And so it came about that the money was deposited in the clerk’s office
in the county court, and on Monday morning, before any of us were
about, the lawyers for Bera, Murphy & Cole, appeared in the courthouse
with an order signed by the judge to draw the money out. Bera got $750
of the $1,000 promised her for maintenance for herself and children and
the lawyers got the remainder.

Is it any wonder, then, that I have often thought it was the easiest
thing in the world for Swiftwater to find a loophole in the meshes of
the law by which he could escape, while I have never yet found a way to
make the law give me just common justice?

And now it was Swiftwater’s turn to act. In another day the newspapers
had his story that he had been “held up,” and after that came a
sensation in the Bar Association of Seattle the like of which is not on
record. And while the lawyers were fighting over the spoils, Swiftwater
cleverly enough, though haunted by the spectre of the state prison, and
constantly pressed by Kitty Gates, his polygamous wife, began working
on Bera’s sympathies. He came to the hotel and went to Bera’s room.

“Bera,” he said, “unless you get a divorce from me, and do it at once,
Kitty will send me to the penitentiary; I will lose all my property in
Alaska, and the boys and you will be everlastingly disgraced.”

Bera listened. It is enough to say that with Swiftwater in the
penitentiary, his mining interests in Alaska, which promised brighter
than anything he had ever undertaken, and that means hundreds of
thousands of dollars, all of Bera’s chance and mine to ever get a new
start in life would have been wasted.

Swiftwater daily said:

“Bera, you certainly love the boys enough to save them the disgrace of
having a felon for a father.”

The argument was enough. Bera consented, and although, as I understand
it, the law specifically prohibits a divorce where the parties agree in
advance on the severance of the holy marriage tie, Swiftwater went away
and Bera brought suit for divorce in the court of King County. And in
time the decree was granted and is still of record in that county.

A week later Swiftwater, as I afterwards found out, joined Kitty Gates
in Portland and the two went to San Francisco. Thus can be turned into
the basest uses the legal processes of our courts and, strange as it
may seem, Swiftwater, after Bera’s divorce, legally married Kitty,
then divorced her, and not later than two years afterwards he told the
newspapers in San Francisco, that having divorced all his other wives,
he was looking for a new one.

I want to ask now, is there no law to reach a monster of this kind?
Are the laws so framed that men of Swiftwater’s type can go at large
throughout the country ruining the lives of young girls, and, followed
by a halo of gold and the fame that quick fortune making brings,
claiming and receiving the friendship of their fellow men?




CHAPTER XVII.


I AM getting to the end of my story, and as the finish draws near, it
seems to me, that I have not quite done justice by Swiftwater Bill,
in at least one respect--and that is the activity and agility the man
displays when events over which he might have had control, had he
been on the square, crowded him so closely, that like the proverbial
flea, he had to hike. And in telling of Swiftwater’s talent in this
direction, I wish to be regarded as speaking as one without malice,
but rather as admiring Swiftwater for trying, in so far as lay in his
power, to make good his nickname of Swiftwater.

In San Francisco, after Swiftwater had obtained a divorce from Kitty,
he immediately announced his intention of getting another wife. For
Swiftwater knew that the prison gates which once had yawned in his
face were now closed, and, better even than that, was the thought that
I--his loving mother-in-law--would no longer be interested in his
future.

It is undoubtedly true that in Swiftwater’s mental processes he
regarded first, the hundreds of thousands of dollars in gold that
lay in the pay streak on No. 6 Cleary, in the Tanana, and I can see
Bill now in my mind’s eye, facing an array of cut glass decanters,
embroidered table cloths, potted plants, orchestra and all that goes
with the swell cafes of San Francisco, eating his dinner and rubbing
his hands with glee as he remembered how easily he had obtained a
fortune from me, which he sunk on Quartz Creek in the Klondike, and
then slid out of paying his debt to me.

The very next season found Swiftwater in the Tanana and this time,
according to the best official records I could obtain, his clean-up was
not less than $200,000. But I had not forgotten that Swiftwater had
told me, first that Number 6 Cleary was a bigger proposition even than
Quartz Creek, and that Gold Stream was one of the richest of all the
undeveloped creeks in the whole Tanana.

For this last information, I will say, I have always been grateful
to Swiftwater, because his belief that the time would come when Gold
Stream would be one of the best producers in all Alaska, led me to
obtain several claims there. And now, let it be known, his prediction
has been fully and completely verified.

But, knowing nothing of Gold Stream, and remembering only that
Swiftwater had added more than $1,000 to his already great obligations
to me, and had provided nothing for his family, I journeyed once more
across the Coast Range of Alaska.

Crossing on the railway from Skagway to White Horse, I met a score or
more of traders with their outfits of provisions and fresh vegetables,
all hurrying to get into Dawson as soon as the ice broke up, to sell
their wares to the miners of the Klondike at fancy prices. There were
several women in the party, some of them bent on joining their husbands
in Dawson.

Three hours ride down the river on a scow, laden with freight of every
character, we struck a sand bar and were compelled to spent the night
in midstream, absolutely without even a crust of bread to eat, and
heaven’s blue our only canopy. The grounding of freight scows in the
upper waters of the Yukon in the spring is a common experience, and
in those days little care was taken to protect the passengers from
suffering hardship and real danger. That night the icy winds blew from
the mountain ranges sixty miles an hour, and we suffered severely, not
having a mouthful of food since the morning before.

The captain of the scow, oblivious to his obligations to his
passengers, had loaned the only small boat he had to a pair of miners
the day before. We could do nothing until they returned. Finally, after
we had been on the bar for more than twelve hours, the men came back
with the boat and took us, two at a time, ashore.

Then, guided by traders, the women in the party were told to walk down
the stream fifteen miles to where there was a camp. It was bitter cold
and the trail was hard to walk. In the afternoon of the day following
our shipwreck, we stopped and the men built a bonfire, while the poor
women fell almost unconscious in front of it, completely exhausted for
want of food, which we had not tasted for twenty-four hours.

Two of the traders went down to the river’s bank and on the other side
they espied a camp of a herder, beneath the shelter of an abandoned
barracks. This was the only human habitation within miles. The traders
procured a boat and took us women across the river. The herder had some
bacon and some dry bread, which he cooked for us. Now, I want to say
that never in my life have I ever eaten anything that tasted so good as
that meal, consisting only of fried bacon strips placed with the gravy
on top of two slices of cold dry bread, and a teacup of hot coffee to
wash it down with.

That day the scow came down the river and again we boarded it and
finally reached Lake Le Barge. The lake was still frozen over and we
started to cross its thirty miles of icy surface with horses drawing
sleds. The ice was getting rotten and four times in as many miles, to
my constant terror, the horses broke through the ice, threatening every
minute to drag me with them. Becoming weary of this, I left the sled
and hired a dog team and outfit to take me across the lake.

At Clark’s road house, I remained a week and then boarded a scow and
went through Thirty-Mile river to board the steamer Thistle for Dawson.
Going down the river on a scow, one scow that was lashed to ours,
struck a rock in midstream, a hole was knocked into our scow, which
almost sunk. The bank of the river was lined with thousands of people
camping or moving on towards the Klondike. These people came to our
rescue and with ropes and small boats helped us off.

In Fairbanks once more, I found Swiftwater. I had telephoned him of my
coming, and in a day or two he came to my hotel.

“Mrs. Beebe,” he said, “here is $50 for your present hotel bills. I
must go back to Cleary Creek at once, but I will be back again inside
of a week, and then I will straighten everything up.”

When Swiftwater told me that, I believed him--for the last time--for
the next morning I found that he had left my room to board a train for
Chena, on the Tanana, with a draft for $50,000 in his inside pocket,
$10,000 more in cash and a ticket for Seattle.

Swiftwater undoubtedly believed, that being without money I would be
compelled to remain an unlimited time in Fairbanks. Not so. I still
had a little jewelry left that he had not persuaded me to pawn or sell
for his benefit, and on this I raised enough money to buy a ticket to
Seattle.

Before I could get there, Swiftwater learned of my coming, and when
I arrived on Elliott Bay, he had applied to the Federal Courts to be
adjudged a bankrupt and had assigned to Phil Wilson all his interests
in the Tanana, amounting to untold wealth.

That case of Swiftwater’s is still pending in the Federal Court in
Seattle, and no judge and no court has ever yet, up to this writing,
consented to declare him a bankrupt, although he has successfully
placed his property in the Tanana beyond the reach of the scores of men
who have befriended him in the past without reward on his part.




CHAPTER XVIII.


AGAIN it is spring, and I sit all alone in my room in Seattle, knowing
that the city is filled with miners, their faces set in the direction
of the Golden North, their hearts beating with high hopes, their
breasts swelling with the happy purpose of getting back once more to
the glacier bound, gold lined gravel beds of Alaska--the treasure land
of the world. I know that I cannot go with them, for Swiftwater has
robbed me of almost every farthing I ever possessed.

I read in the Seattle papers that scores of the old-timers are in the
hotels down town, laying up stores of supplies, mining outfits, etc.,
ready for a big summer’s season of work in the north, of digging far
below the surface to the eternally frozen bedrock, in search of the
only thing which is imperishable among all the perishable things of
this earth--GOLD. I can see them thronging the hotel lobbies, the bars,
and the cafes--great, burly, broad-shouldered, big-chested men of the
North--the bone and sinew of the greatest gold-producing country in the
world.

Many have bought their tickets and stateroom reservations for the
first Nome steamers, weeks in advance, unmindful of the fact that
their ship must plough her dangerous way through great icebergs and
ice floes in Bering Sea. Scores of others are planning to take the
first boats of the spring season, while yet winter lingers with heavy
hand on Alaska’s coast and inland valleys, on their way to Valdez and
thence over the ice to the Tanana, four hundred miles away. No thought
of cold, or hardship, or danger deters any of these men, and even
women, because they know at the end of the journey their mission will
not be valueless, and that for at least a great proportion of them
there will be a real shining pot of gold at the end of their rainbow of
hope--where’er they find it--even though they must needs go as far as
the rim of the Arctic Circle.

Many of my friends tell me that Swiftwater’s life story, as I have
set it down here, recounting only the facts, sparing nothing, adding
nothing, will be eagerly read by tens of thousands of Alaska people. If
this is true, then will Swiftwater be known in his true light to all
that multitude of adventurous men and women of the North, who come and
go through Seattle, fall and spring, spring and fall, like the myriads
of Alaska’s water fowl who seek the sunny South in October, to speed
their way north again in the spring, the moment the ice floes in the
headwaters of the Yukon are gone.

And now, as I survey my work, I am moved to ask all who read, if they
can answer this question:

“What manner of man, in Heaven’s name, is this Swiftwater Bill Gates?”

Yes, what manner of man, or other creature is Swiftwater? Perhaps some
people will say that when Swiftwater Bill, down deep in his prospect
hole on Eldorado, looked upon the glittering drift of gold that covered
the bedrock, the glamor of that shining mass gave him a sort of moral
blindness, from which he has never recovered. It is possible that the
lure of gold, which he had seen in such boundless quantities, had so
entered into his very soul that all sense of his duty and obligations
as a man may have been dwarfed or utterly eliminated.

Be that as it may, Swiftwater, after he had placed his properties
on Cleary Creek in the hands of Phil Wilson, so that his creditors
could not lay hands on any of his money or by any means satisfy their
just debts, went down into Nevada and plunged heavily in Rawhide and
Goldfield properties. Rumors reached me many times that Swiftwater has
made another fortune, and the San Francisco papers printed such stories
about him. His property on Number 6 Cleary is still a big producer of
gold, and it seems that by merely turning his hands, Swiftwater could,
within a few months, pile up enough money to make happy those who have
innocently suffered such grievous wrong at his hands. And here my heart
grows hard as I think of the farce of the law--how fine are its meshes
if an innocent person is taken--how wide are its loop holes when the
smooth and oily crook with money becomes entangled therein.

For why is it, that the courts will suffer a lecherous monster to go
abroad in the land, to marry and re-marry without paying the slightest
heed to the restrictions of the law; to abduct, seduce and then abandon
young girls and leave them penniless and deserted in unknown lands?

And, why is it that such men can, by using heavy tips of gold, weigh
down the hands of the sworn officers of the law, manage to slip
unharmed and unhampered through counties and states where the processes
in bankruptcy and in criminal proceeding, issued by the courts of law,
are out against them?

Why is it, then, that a man like Swiftwater could come to Seattle at
night locked in the drawing room of a Pullman car, be taken swiftly in
a closed carriage to a steamer bound for Valdez, and remain hidden in
his stateroom on board the boat for two days before the ship sailed,
while deputy sheriffs were scouring the town to compel him to provide
from the ample money he had, food and clothing for the wife and babies
he had deserted?

Perhaps, after all, Swiftwater’s belief that the power of gold is
omnipotent, may be the true and right one. Gold in the hands of such a
man is a monstrous implement of crime, of degeneration to women and to
innocent children.




CHAPTER XIX.


“MAMA, don’t you think you can have some fireworks on the Fourth of
July and come out to the Brothers School so that we can celebrate?”

Little Freddie Gates, Swiftwater’s youngest boy, looked up in my face
with the dearest kind of a smile, and put his arm on my shoulder. The
little fellow had just had his night bath in my room and had put on his
fresh, clean, white pajamas, ready for bed.

It was Saturday before the Fourth of July and Freddie knew that I might
not be able to spend Sunday with him at the Brothers School--which was
the first Sunday since Freddie was taken there that I had not spent the
day with him.

Now, it may seem odd to you and all the rest who have followed the
story of Swiftwater’s fortunes and misfortunes, that I have never told
you about the two dear little boys--Bera’s children--who all these
years have been without a father’s care and who call their Grandma
“Mama.”

And this brings me to the story of how Clifford, the child who first
saw the light of day on Gold Quartz Creek in order to satisfy his
father’s pride, as I have already told, was stolen from me by Lena
Hubbell, the nurse. Clifford is the oldest boy of the two, and as
dear a little fellow and as manly and straightforward and handsome as
any boy you ever saw in your life. When the papers in Seattle told of
Swiftwater making a big strike in the Tanana, Bera and I and all of us
felt that at last there would be a brighter dawning and a better day,
and an end of the drudgery and sacrifice and slavish toil which had
been our portion.

A day or two after the story of Swiftwater’s gold find came over the
wires, Lena, into whose custody I had placed Clifford, came to me
saying:

“Mrs. Beebe, if you don’t care, I’d like to take Clifford on a little
trip of two or three weeks to Mt. Vernon. I have some friends there and
I need a vacation and a rest.”

I had befriended Lena in the North and had done everything I could for
her. I trusted the girl implicitly and it is not to be wondered at that
I quickly gave her permission to take Clifford with her to Mt. Vernon,
which is only a half day’s ride or less from Seattle.

I told Lena to take good care of the child and be sure that she wrote
me every few days--and this she promised to do.

Two weeks went by and I heard no word from Lena. I feared the child
might be ill and wrote and then telegraphed without receiving an answer
to either. The last letter was returned to me unopened.

That afternoon I took the last train for Mt. Vernon, and before I went
to bed in the little hotel there, I found that my worst fears were
true--Lena had left, leaving no address, and had taken Clifford with
her. Later, I found she had taken the boy to Canada.

I have not heard directly from Lena and Clifford, although I know what
fate has befallen the boy, and that he is alive and well. Of course, I
do not know that Lena Hubbell deliberately planned to kidnap Clifford,
believing that his father, when he had amassed another fortune, would
pay a large sum for his recovery.

As soon as I had found in Fairbanks that Swiftwater was coming out,
I urged him then and there, with all the power and earnestness at my
command, to send an officer for Lena Hubbell and the child into Canada
and bring the boy home.

Swiftwater has not spent a dollar in this endeavor, although it has
cost me several hundred dollars in futile efforts to bring the boy home.

Those two boys--Clifford and Freddie--are all that I have left in this
world to live for. Freddie is seven years old, bright, plump, well
developed and very affectionate. It is said of him that he learns very
quickly and remembers well, and the dear Fathers at the Brothers School
at South Park, who have taken care of him, fed him and clothed him for
months without a dollar of Swiftwater’s money, say that he will some
day make a name in the world.

And now, I am going to take you, my reader, into my confidence and tell
you something that is sacred. These boys, I feel, are my own flesh and
blood--my own boys.

If my story will throw some new light on the hardships of women who
are forced to go to the North in search of a livelihood or shall be
read with interest by all my old friends in Alaska, I shall rest
content. I have a mission to perform--the care and education of my two
boys--Clifford and Freddie.


                               THE END.




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

--Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The True Life Story of Swiftwater Bill
Gates, by Iola Beebe

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TRUE LIFE STORY--SWIFTWATER BILL GATES ***

***** This file should be named 47979-0.txt or 47979-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/9/7/47979/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

