The Project Gutenberg EBook of Florida Salads, by Frances Barber Harris

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Florida Salads

Author: Frances Barber Harris

Release Date: August 28, 2015 [EBook #49803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLORIDA SALADS ***




Produced by WebRover, Chris Curnow, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)







                            Copyright 1914




                            FLORIDA SALADS

                       “Nothing lovelier can be
                        found in woman, than to
                        study household good.”
                               --Milton.

                         FRANCES BARBER HARRIS
                                 1914
                         JACKSONVILLE, FLORIDA




Preface.


If the writer can impress upon the readers of this little salad book the
importance of eating salads, the writing of it will not be in vain.

The addition of a pretty salad to a menu not only gives a refined,
attractive appearance to the table, but is appetizing, and, I might say,
almost a necessity in this climate, speaking from a health standpoint.
Fruits and vegetables contain a large amount of the necessary salts
required by the system, and as for olive oil, the many benefits derived
from the use of pure olive oil are so great that it is considered by
good authority a positive beautifier. We all know that celery and onions
are soothing to the nerves.

This is not a very comprehensive work, but a collection of a few
practical, palatable recipes, combined, proportioned and tested by the
author. It is especially written with the hope that it will be of some
assistance to young housekeepers in making their meals attractive and
dainty. With a few exceptions, the materials used in these salads are
produced in Florida.

In making salads there is a field for a great deal of originality. With
a little taste and painstaking care, most attractive, and at the same
time wholesome dishes may be originated.




Important Pointers.


Of course only the freshest and best materials are reckoned in these
recipes. It is a mistake to think the mixing will hide the quality.

Lettuce, endive, celery, and all salad greens should be most carefully
washed, crisped one hour in ice water, put into a cheese cloth bag and
kept near the ice until needed; or, shake gently, put into a covered
stone jar and set in cool place. Cover jar with cloth before putting on
the top. All salad materials should be thoroughly cold and salads kept
cold until served.

Pecans can be cracked easily and meats gotten out whole if they are
scalded and left in the hot water a few moments; crack lengthwise. Scald
nut meats to blanch.

Do not be afraid to use red pepper in salads. It is wholesome and often
prevents them from being indigestible.

Salads should not be mixed any longer before serving than absolutely
necessary.

Onions should be sliced and soaked at least one hour in ice water before
using for salads. They are milder and not so apt to disagree with one.
Cucumbers should be sliced thinly and crisped in ice water one hour
before eating. It makes them more wholesome.

Let the hands come in contact with salads as little as possible. Use
fork and spoon for mixing dressings and tossing salads together. When
convenient make French dressing and mix salad at the table.

A small lump of ice put into French dressing while being made keeps it
cool and makes it milder.

A tiny pinch of sugar improves most salads.

The secret of making mayonnaise that will not curdle is in using
perfectly fresh eggs and cold, pure olive oil. Care and judgment is also
needed; materials differ and have to be used accordingly. Stir in one
direction.

It is best not to use silver or metal utensil in making dressing or in
mixing salads. The writer uses an orange wood fork and spoon. The wood
is hard and does not discolor.

A heavy white porcelain bowl holding about one quart is a convenient
size in which to mix mayonnaise.

Squeeze lemon and strain juice before beginning mayonnaise.

When mayonnaise loosens or begins to curdle, put in a pinch of corn
starch, or if it separates after making, put an egg yolk into a fresh
bowl and gradually stir mayonnaise into it.

The writer never uses cream in combination with salad dressings, from
the fact that lemon juice and vinegar curdle cream. The desired quantity
of the following is a good substitute: one teacupful of fresh, rich,
sweet milk thickened with one teaspoonful of corn starch cooked in a
double boiler; when it begins to thicken add one teaspoonful of butter.
When it is the consistency of thick cream, remove from fire, beat well
and put near ice until needed. It will be referred to in these recipes
as Cream Substitute.

When canned meats are used for salads, the can should be opened at least
half hour before using, meat placed in a porcelain, glass or china bowl
and thoroughly aerated.

Lettuce is so succulent and easy to bruise that breaking or pulling it
to pieces with the fingers is a more delicate way than cutting with a
knife.

Salads should never be sour but so delicately blended that no seasoning
predominates.

“Distrust the condiment that bites too soon.”

A little claret added to Plain Mayonnaise is very nice for fruit salads.

Before making sandwiches, bread may be peeled, or all crust taken off
with a very sharp knife.

Slightly melt butter before spreading on bread for sandwiches.

It is best to spread butter on end of loaf before slicing for
sandwiches. Use very sharp knife for cutting bread.

An ordinary tea cup, level full, rounded table spoon and tea spoon are
used for measuring these recipes.




Salad Dressings.


COOKED YELLOW SALAD DRESSING.

Three tablespoonfuls of vinegar, one scant teaspoonful of salt, one half
teaspoonful mustard, one teaspoonful sugar, white and red pepper to make
rather hot; cook in double boiler and when hot add one half teacup of
butter. When butter is melted stir in yolks of three well beaten eggs
and continue to stir until mixture is the consistency of thick cream.
Take from fire, beat well and put on ice. When thoroughly chilled, fold
in the well beaten white of an egg.


COOKED WHITE SALAD DRESSING.

One cup of fresh, rich, sweet milk. Thicken with one teaspoonful of corn
starch and cook in a double boiler. When it begins to thicken add one
tablespoonful of butter, stirring until as thick as heavy cream. Remove
from fire and add one half teaspoonful of salt, two tablespoonfuls of
tarragon vinegar, white pepper to taste and beat until smooth. When cold
fold in one egg white, well beaten.


LEMON DRESSING.

One-half teaspoonful of salt well sprinkled with white pepper, three
tablespoonfuls of olive oil and the juice of half a lemon beaten
alternately until thick.


FRENCH DRESSING.

One teaspoonful of salt, tabasco or cayenne and black pepper to taste;
one half cup of cold olive oil, one and one-half tablespoonfuls of
vinegar. Stir oil and vinegar alternately into salt and pepper with an
orange wood fork until thick. Serve at once.

Instead of olive oil, bacon grease is sometimes used. It is then called
German dressing instead of French dressing.


NUT DRESSING.

Pound into a smooth paste pecan meats and mix with French dressing, or
mix peanut butter with French dressing. Nice to serve over plain
lettuce.


MAYONNAISE, PLAIN.

Put yolks of two eggs and one teaspoonful of salt into a cold bowl and
stir until smooth with an orange wood fork; gradually add cold olive oil
and lemon juice alternately until one and one-half cups of oil and the
juice of one small lemon have been used. Season with Tabasco to taste.
This makes a stiff mayonnaise. Lightly fold into it one egg white beaten
dry. If a milder dressing is preferred, mix the above with equal part of
cream substitute. This recipe can be doubled or halved.


MAYONNAISE No. 1.

Two yolks, one-half teaspoonful salt, dash of mustard, sprinkling of
white pepper, a pinch of sugar and six drops of Tabasco. Stir smoothly
and add, a few drops at a time, cold olive oil until it is thick and
cakes on the spoon. Thin with lemon juice and add oil and lemon juice
alternately until one and one-half cups of oil and juice of one small
lemon have been used. A few drops of vinegar may also be added. Cooking
oil is used by some in place of olive oil.


MAYONNAISE No. 2.

Yolks of two hard boiled eggs, one raw yolk, a quarter of a teaspoonful
of mustard, one teaspoonful of salt, cayenne to taste, juice of half a
lemon, a tablespoonful of vinegar and two cups of olive oil. Work the
oil and seasoning gradually into the cold yolks as in plain mayonnaise.
This dressing can be increased in quantity by adding cream substitute.


GREEN MAYONNAISE.

Soak strips of sweet, green peppers in slightly salted ice water two
hours. Drain, chop finely with a sharp knife and fold into mayonnaise.


RED MAYONNAISE.

Cut pimentoes into fine pieces and fold into mayonnaise.


DEEP YELLOW MAYONNAISE.

Mash one teaspoonful of butter into the yolks of two hard boiled eggs
while warm, and when cold stir into the plain mayonnaise.


ROQUEFORT DRESSING.

French dressing with Roquefort cheese mashed smoothly into it.


LEMON JELLY.

One package of gelatine soaked in one cup of cold water; add one-half
cup of lemon juice, tablespoonful of sugar and two and half cups of
boiling water. Cook a few seconds. Clarify with whites of two eggs.




Dinner Salads.


LETTUCE HEART SALAD No. 1.

Leaves of small lettuce hearts slightly pulled apart, thoroughly washed
and soaked in ice water one hour. Drain, dip in French dressing and
sprinkle with finely shredded celery mixed with chopped pimentoes. Serve
with or without mayonnaise, one to each person.


LETTUCE HEART SALAD No. 2.

Lettuce hearts prepared as above and sprinkled with finely chopped nut
meats instead of celery and pimentoes. Serve with mayonnaise.


LETTUCE SALAD.

Select the white inner leaves of a cabbage head lettuce. Serve a few
leaves on a plate dressed with Roquefort dressing.


ENDIVE SALAD.

Pick well bleached endive apart, wash well and crisp one-half hour in
ice water. Shake and marinate in French dressing.


MALAGA SALAD.

With a sharp knife slit one side of large Malaga grapes, take out the
seed and fill with blanched pecan meats. For each plate, put two leaves
of romaine side by side pinched together, and a row of grapes in each
leaf resembling peas in a pod. Put one-half teaspoonful of Green
Mayonnaise on the ends of each leaf.


TOMATO CUPS.

Large, firm, cold tomatoes peeled with a thin bladed sharp knife; scoop
out the centers and fill with chopped celery and nuts mixed with
mayonnaise. Serve on lettuce leaves.


AVOCADO PEAR SALAD.

Cut pears in half lengthwise and remove seed; sprinkle with salt, pepper
and lemon or lime juice and eat with a spoon. One-half to each person.


ROMAINE SALAD.

Wash romaine lettuce well, crisp in ice water, dress with French
dressing mixed with finely chopped pimentoes. Dress at table.


BELL PEPPER SALAD.

Finely shred large, sweet bell peppers and soak one hour in ice water;
drain and chop fine. Prepare endive in same manner and mix together with
French dressing to which a little Worcestershire and Tabasco sauce have
been added. Put a thin slice of a large firm tomato on each place and a
tablespoonful of salad on each slice. This is rather a hot salad and a
little suffices. It is also good with deviled crabs for a Luncheon or
Bridge.


ASPARAGUS SALAD.

Cooked asparagus chilled, a few stalks put on lettuce leaves, sprinkled
with chopped nuts and served with mayonnaise.


STRING BEAN SALAD.

Cold string beans which have been cooked in the old fashioned Southern
way with bacon, mixed with chopped tomatoes, onions, and cucumbers and
dressed with a French dressing. Add a little Tabasco and Worcestershire
sauce to dressing. Serve on lettuce leaves or a tablespoonful on salad
plate with curled round radish on side. Of course the onions and
cucumbers must be soaked in ice water and drained before adding to
salad.


GREEN PEA SALAD.

Boil peas in salted water and drain. Boil mushrooms in salted water,
chop and drain. Mix peas and mushrooms together with French dressing.
Scoop the center out of firm tomatoes, fill with the mixture and put on
lettuce leaves. Sprinkle a few peas around the tomatoes and put a
spoonful of Red Mayonnaise on top.


CELERY STICK SALAD No. 1.

Wash celery well with a brush, crisp in ice water and dry. Select well
grooved stalks, remove strings or threads, cut in uniform lengths and
fill grooves with cold tomato jelly, just before it hardens. Serve two
stalks on two romaine lettuce leaves with a teaspoonful of mayonnaise
on side of plate. Eat with fingers, dipping celery ends in dressing.


CELERY STICK SALAD No. 2.

Prepare celery as in recipe for Celery Stick Salad No. 1. Fill grooves
with cream cheese mashed with pimento. Serve in same way.


CELERY SALAD.

Chop crisp celery and mix with blanched, broken pecan meats. Put two
romaine lettuce leaves on each plate, and in the middle, along the
length of each leaf put a little row of the mixture, with a small stream
of mayonnaise on top.


TOMATO JELLY.

Mash fresh tomatoes through a sieve, enough to make pint and half.
Dissolve one package of gelatine, add to tomatoes, season with cloves,
salt, celery seed and white pepper. Boil a few seconds, remove from
fire, strain, and when cold set near ice.


CUCUMBER SALAD.

Two long glass house cucumbers and one medium white onion sliced thinly
and soaked in ice water. Drain well and lightly mix with two cold, firm
tomatoes cut with a sharp knife into small pieces. Add a little
Worcestershire sauce and a pinch of sugar to a plain French dressing and
pour over salad and serve on lettuce leaves.


CAULIFLOWER SALAD.

Boil cauliflower in salted water until tender and drain. Put a spray of
it on a lettuce leaf with a few blocks of hard boiled egg. Dress with a
spoonful of mayonnaise dressing.


SPINACH SALAD.

Boil spinach until tender. Salt and pepper while cooking. When done,
mash fine, drain, and season with butter. Mince cucumber pickle, add to
spinach and mould in individual moulds. Turn out on a bed of cress, put
grated hard boiled eggs around the base and Green Mayonnaise on top.


RADISH SALAD.

Peel firm young radishes, cut in small pieces, and soak in ice water
one-half hour. Drain and mix with broken blanched pecan meats. Serve on
lettuce with Mayonnaise No. 2. Garnish with round red radishes sliced in
the shape of roses.


CABBAGE SALAD.

The half of one small, hard, white cabbage shredded finely, mixed with
one small, white onion chopped and all soaked in ice water two hours.
Drain well and mix with half the amount of finely shredded celery; dust
with cayenne, sprinkle with a pinch of sugar and dress with French
dressing containing a dash of Worcestershire sauce. Serve in a nest of
endive and put a few small blocks of red beet which have been dressed
with vinegar, on top.


STRAWBERRY SALAD.

Slice strawberries. Add half the quantity of thinly sliced kumquats and
sprinkle lightly with sugar. Dress with a very little lemon dressing and
put in small cup shaped leaves of white lettuce. Garnish with a large
strawberry, with cap and stem.


MAMMEE-SAPOTA SALAD.

Cut in half, remove seed and dress with lemon dressing, adding a few
drops of the juice of sour sops. Serve on lettuce leaf and eat with a
spoon. This is a very pretty dish.


FLORIDA SALAD.

Peel grapefruit, oranges, and tangerines; divide into lobes, remove
white skin and seed, and put on lettuce leaves. Cut a pineapple into
small square blocks and pile a little on top of each plate of salad.
Around the salad put slices of banana with a little lemon juice squeezed
over. Serve with mayonnaise.




Luncheon Salads.


AVOCADO PEAR SALAD.

Cut the meat of an avocado pear in strips, lengthwise, then cut into
square blocks. Mix carefully, without mashing, with cold hard boiled
eggs, cut up. If the pears are not too large, fill hulls with the salad
and place on lettuce or serve on lettuce without the hulls. Dress with
Mayonnaise No. 2.


OYSTER SALAD.

One pint of small, fresh oysters. Strain the liquor and rinse the
oysters in ice water; put oysters back in liquor and scald until well
curled. Drain and chill. Mix with equal quantity of diced celery, one
small cucumber pickle chopped fine, a sprinkling of cayenne, and one
cupful of chopped mushrooms. Serve on lettuce with Green Mayonnaise.


TUNA SALAD.

Mix equal quantity of tuna and chopped celery. Slice midget cucumber
pickles in lengthwise, small strips, mix with the fish and celery and
sprinkle with cayenne. Serve on lettuce leaves and dress with Mayonnaise
No. 2. This salad is also nice for bridge parties. The tuna fish is
often called the “Chicken of the sea.”


TURKEY SALAD.

Put a thin slice of tender turkey on a lettuce leaf. Mince celery and
truffles, mix with mayonnaise and put a little mound of it on each
piece of turkey and top with a Salmiring. (Rings cut from seeded
olives.)


CHICKEN ASPIC SALAD.

Cover a four pound fat chicken with boiling water, season with salt and
black pepper, and simmer until tender. Remove chicken. Season liquor
with a finely chopped small onion, a few cloves, a dash of cayenne and
boil down to about one pint and a half. Soak one box of gelatine in a
cup of cold water with one tablespoonful of lemon juice added. Pour into
chicken stock and boil a few seconds. Remove from the fire and strain,
then clarify with the whites of two eggs. Dice the cold chicken and add
half the quantity of celery cut fine. Just before the gelatine begins to
set, put a little in the bottom of individual cups, add chicken and
celery and finish the top with more gelatine. Put cups near ice until
ready to serve. Turn out of cups--using a thin bladed warm knife--on
lettuce leaves, and with a paper tube squeeze a little ring of stiff
mayonnaise around the base of salad. Put an olive and two maraschino
cherries on top of each.


SARDINE EGGS.

Hard boiled eggs split lengthwise in halves and a teaspoonful of sardine
mayonnaise on top, served on lettuce leaves.

Sardine Mayonnaise: plain mayonnaise with boned sardines mashed into it.
Make pretty hot with tabasco and add finely chopped cucumber pickles.


EGG LILIES.

Carefully cut the white of hard boiled eggs down lengthwise to form
petals. At the base of each petal put a drop of Deep Yellow Mayonnaise
and on top of the yolk, in center, make a tiny indentation and fill with
Green Mayonnaise.

These are pretty to serve on a helped plate containing cold boiled ham
and sandwiches.

Put a few nasturtium leaves around the lilies.


CHICKEN SALAD.

Salt and pepper one four pound fat chicken and simmer in water enough to
cover until perfectly tender. When done, remove chicken, and if there is
too much liquor boil down until there is just about enough in which to
jelly the chicken. With the kitchen scissors, cut the chicken into half
inch pieces and leave in liquor over night on ice. Just before serving,
mix jellied chicken with equal quantity of diced, crisp celery and two
teacupsful of broken pecan meats. Turn all into a large mixing bowl, add
one-half teacup of plain French dressing and with salad fork and spoon
lightly toss together. Serve with mayonnaise on lettuce leaves and
garnish with slices of cold, hard boiled eggs and Salmirings.

Veal is often combined with half the amount of chicken in making this
salad. Cover veal with water, season with salt and pepper and simmer
until done. Cut in small pieces and mix with chicken, half veal and half
chicken.


SALMON SALAD.

Bone and drain one medium sized can of the best salmon and sprinkle
lightly with cayenne. Dice an equal quantity of crisp celery, add a few
capers to French dressing and toss all together with fork and spoon.
Serve on lettuce leaves. Grate the whites and yolks of hard boiled eggs
separately, sprinkle a little grated white on top of each serving and
the grated yolks in a ring around the base. Put a teaspoonful of Green
Mayonnaise on top.


CRAB SALAD.

Flake freshly boiled crab meat, sprinkle with cayenne and chill. Before
putting into refrigerator, cool and put into a closely covered dish, as
the odor of fish is disagreeable in a refrigerator. Chop celery, mix
with crab meat, add a squeeze of lemon juice, a sprinkling of salt and
serve in shells with mayonnaise on top, or serve on lettuce leaves and
garnish with thin slices of cucumbers that have been marinated in French
dressing.


SHRIMP SALAD.

Boil and peel fresh shrimps and soak in ice water half hour, drain and
sprinkle with cayenne. Chill shrimp and mix with equal quantity of crisp
celery, a little lemon juice and a sprinkling of salt. Serve in halves
of large green, bell peppers, cut lengthwise. Put Green Mayonnaise on
top and serve on lettuce leaves.


KIPPERED HERRING SALAD.

Flake kippered herring and take out bones. Boil small new Irish
potatoes, in jackets, peel and slice. Slice pickled pearl onions. Gently
mix all together. Dress with French dressing and garnish with sliced
pimolas.


LOBSTER SALAD.

Flake the meat of freshly boiled lobster and chill; add chopped celery
and hard boiled eggs cut into blocks. Season with French dressing to
which a few drops of sherry have been added. Serve in a nest of endive
with mayonnaise.


ROAST BEEF SALAD.

One cupful of cold, roast beef and one cupful of cold Irish potatoes cut
into half inch pieces. Chop one small, white onion and two firm
tomatoes, drain and add to beef and potatoes. Season with red pepper, a
little horseradish, Worcestershire sauce, and French dressing and serve
on small white cabbage leaves.


POTATO SALAD.

Boil Irish potatoes in skins, peel and cut in small blocks. Mix with
half the amount of chopped celery and one fourth the amount of broken
pecans, blanched. Season with Mayonnaise No. 2. Carefully put on lettuce
leaves, without mashing the potato, and garnish with slices of hard
boiled eggs and a little minced pimento.


POTATO ROSE SALAD.

Two cups of hot Irish potato, yolks of two hard boiled eggs, two
tablespoonfuls of butter and a little onion juice mashed through a
potato masher. When cold, add one cup of finely minced celery, season
with French dressing and shape into roses with a pastry tube or form the
petals with a teaspoon on a lettuce leaf. In the center of each rose put
a drop of Green Mayonnaise. On the side of the plate put a little ball
of cream cheese mixed with pimentoes and mashed between two halves of
English walnut meats.


PINEAPPLE SALAD.

Cut the top from a nice, Smooth Cayenne pineapple and scoop out the
inside. Cut pineapple and celery into small pieces, mix with nuts and
mayonnaise and fill the pineapple case. Chill, and put on a pretty salad
dish in a bed of lettuce leaves.


CUCUMBER BOATS.

Cut six, fresh, green cucumbers lengthwise in half, carefully remove
inside and put boats--cut side--on ice until ready to serve. Cut the
inside into small slices, cut four firm tomatoes into small pieces and
one small white onion finely chopped. Drain well and just before
serving, toss together with a French dressing. Fill boats and put on
romaine leaves. Fine to serve on the same plate with deviled crab at a
morning bridge party.


CHEESE AND NUT SALAD.

Mash American cream cheese with pimentoes and peanut butter. Form into
balls and press between halves of blanched English walnut meats. Serve
on lettuce leaf with mayonnaise.


GRAPEFRUIT SALAD.

Cut fruit in half, remove inside carefully, and take white skin from
sections. Lightly mix with Malaga grapes stuffed with nuts; squeeze a
little orange juice over salad; refill hulls and serve on lettuce with
mayonnaise.


SALAD IN GRAPEFRUIT HULLS.

Halve grapefruit crossways, scoop out contents and notch edges of hulls.
Line the hulls with lettuce and fill with chicken salad; garnish with
maraschino cherries and Salmirings. Serve in a bed of endive with
mayonnaise. Put meat of grapefruit in refrigerator and serve next
morning for breakfast in glasses.


ORANGE SALAD.

Orange and grapefruit lobes, mixed with blanched English walnut meats on
lettuce with mayonnaise.


TANGERINE SALAD.

Peel tangerines, divide the lobes and carefully remove seed. Sprinkle
with ground pecans and serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.


BANANA SALAD.

Cut lengthwise a firm, perfect banana and remove inside carefully
forming a boat shaped case. Slice ripe strawberries, mix with the sliced
banana meat and sprinkle with a little sugar. Pour Lemon Dressing over
and carefully fill banana cases without mashing fruit. Place cases on
strawberry leaves. This is dainty served with grated cheese toasted on
crackers, and hot Russian tea.


SALAD IN APPLE CASES.

Select large, bright, red apples. Slice a piece from the top and
carefully remove the inside without cutting the case. Mop the edge of
cases with lemon juice and put near the ice until ready to serve. Stuff
white cherries with nuts to fill the cases, put mayonnaise on top and
serve on lettuce leaves with a row of little square blocks of the apples
around the cases. Apple meat must be dipped in lemon water as soon as
apples are cut to prevent its turning dark.


ORANGE BASKETS.

With a sharp, small knife, carefully cut large oranges in the shape of
baskets with handles, and remove inside. Tie sprays of orange blossoms,
or any small white flowers on handles with green baby ribbon. Fill
baskets with chicken salad, put mayonnaise with a maraschino cherry on
top of each and serve on sprays of orange leaves.


KUMQUAT SALAD.

Split kumquats lengthways in half and mix with equal quantities of red
salad cherries. Put a little lemon jelly in cups, fill nearly full with
fruit and cover with jelly just before it begins to harden. Set on ice
over night. Turn out on lettuce leaves and dress with mayonnaise mixed
with ground, white pecan meats.


LOQUAT SALAD.

Wash and slice loquats and kumquats thinly, then mix with sliced cold
boiled chestnuts and serve on lettuce with mayonnaise.


LEMON AND TOMATO SALAD.

Lemon jelly and tomato jelly moulded in square moulds. When cold and
firm slice into squares; put lemon square on lettuce leaf and tomato
square on top with a spoonful of Deep Yellow Mayonnaise in center. On
the side of the plate put a slice of the following: mash Red Mayonnaise
with cream cheese smoothly, stuff sweet bell peppers with it firmly and
put near ice until ready to serve. Slice with sharp knife in thin round
slices.


MANGO SALAD.

Wash mangoes, slice in long thin slices and serve on lettuce leaves with
Lemon Dressing and a few drops of sour sops. Select the mangoes that are
not stringy.


COCOANUT SALAD.

Cut large selected oranges in half, carefully get the meat out and mix
with freshly grated cocoanut. Put back into the orange hulls and dress
each with a teaspoonful of mayonnaise mixed with Cream Substitute. Put a
maraschino cherry on top and serve on nasturtium leaves and flowers.


TOMATO JELLY SALAD.

Mould tomato jelly in individual cups and put on ice. When ready to
serve turn out on lettuce leaves with Green Mayonnaise and capers on
top. This can be varied by putting nuts and chopped celery in jelly just
before it congeals.


GUAVA SALAD.

Select large, lemon guavas, cut off tops and scoop out seed. Dip hulls
in lemon water to prevent turning dark. Mix sliced truffles with broken
pecan meats, fill hulls and put mayonnaise mixed with Cream Substitute
on top. Serve on lettuce leaves.




Bridge Salads.


LETTUCE AND MAYONNAISE.

Mix finely minced capers and cucumber pickles with mayonnaise and add a
suspicion of mustard and grated horseradish. Select small white cup
shaped lettuce leaves and put a teaspoonful of the dressing on each
leaf. This is nice to serve with hot fried scallops, one leaf on each
plate.


GRAPEFRUIT AND PINEAPPLE SALAD.

Begin at the stem end of grapefruit and cut the peel nearly half way in
six deep points. Curl the points back towards the outside of the fruit.
Scoop out the meat, remove all seeds and white skin and mix with equal
amount of shredded pineapple. Color the inside of the grapefruit case a
cherry red with a tablet, dissolved in water, that comes with gelatine.
In the bottom of case put a folded lettuce leaf--otherwise it would be
too large--and fill with the fruit mixture.

Top with a spoonful of mayonnaise and a few maraschino cherries. Serve
on lettuce. This is attractive.


TOMATO LILY.

Select large firm tomatoes of uniform size, with a sharp small knife
carefully slice the thin outer skin, separate from the meat, into six
petal shaped sections and curl them back from the tomato. Then slice or
split the meat of the tomato into two rows of petals, making three rows
in all. Bend or curl the petals carefully back away from the center or
round ball of seeds. In the center of tomato or seed ball make a hole
and fill with mayonnaise with a drop of Green Mayonnaise on top. Place
on lettuce leaf. This is a little trouble, but is a dainty, pretty way
to serve tomatoes. It is very necessary to have fresh firm tomatoes and
a knife with a small sharp blade.


GRAPEFRUIT JELLY.

Dissolve one package of gelatine in one cup of warm water, add three
cups of strained grapefruit juice and one tablespoonful of sugar. Let
come to a boil, remove from fire and put into a square porcelain mould.

Dissolve one package of gelatine in one cup of boiling water, add three
cups of claret with one tablespoonful of sugar. Mould in a square
porcelain mould. Put a square of grapefruit jelly on top of a square of
claret jelly and a few red salad cherries stuffed with nuts on top.
Serve with Nut Dressing on large lettuce leaves.


GOLDEN-ROD SALAD.

Tear lettuce leaves into uneven sprays, stripping the stems about two
inches. Dip in French dressing, gently shake and put on pretty salad
plates, one spray on each plate. First cover the sprays with ground
pecans or peanuts and then with grated egg yolks. By the side of the
salad put a ring of the whites of the eggs with a spoonful of deep
Yellow Mayonnaise in them. Serve browned almonds with this. To brown
almonds: blanch them and brown in smoking hot olive oil and butter.
Drain and sprinkle lightly with salt.


SALMON SALAD.

Flake salmon, mix with English walnuts, blanched, chopped celery and
mayonnaise, mixed with a little chopped chow chow. Serve in lengthwise
halves of large green peppers on lettuce.


SAPODILLO SALAD.

Cut fruit in half, remove seed, dress with Lemon Dressing and eat with a
spoon. Serve on lettuce leaves.


CABBAGE PALMETTO SALAD.

Get the tender, white buds from tops of cabbage palmettoes, cut in inch
pieces and soak in ice water one hour. Drain, sprinkle with cayenne and
mix with equal quantity of diced celery. Serve with Cooked Dressing and
a few pearl onions.


PORCUPINE SALAD.

Peel six long firm ripe pears, cut lengthwise in halves and core. Cover
with water, add one tablespoonful of sugar and one of lemon juice;
simmer until tender but still firm. When ice cold, stick the outer side
of each piece full of almond bristles, made by splitting blanched
almonds and cutting lengthwise into narrow pieces. In the large end of
each half of pear put two tiny round eyes cut from maraschino cherries
and in the small end stick a small curved piece of conserved citron for
the tail. Serve on lettuce leaf, one to each person. On side of plate
put a spoonful of mayonnaise with two pistachio nuts in it. Canned pears
may also be used for this salad.


BIRD’S NEST SALAD.

Select large apples, peel and cut lengthwise into shoe strings, or small
as can be cut not to break, letting the pieces fall into a pan of lemon
water. On a white lettuce leaf make a nest or pen of apple shreds and
fill with white cherries stuffed with nuts. Dress with a spoonful of Red
Mayonnaise on top. The apples should stay in lemon water about five
minutes and then put on a cloth to drain before using.


BANANA SALAD.

Peel bananas and slice in round thin slices; squeeze a little lemon
juice over them and mix with equal quantity of blanched English walnuts.
Serve on white lettuce leaves with mayonnaise.


SARDINES IN LEMON JELLY.

Put one small sardine in the bottom of each individual mould or cup and
fill half full of lemon jelly. Just before it hardens put a slice of
firm cold tomato on each and put by the ice. When firm turn out of
moulds on lettuce leaves, tomato slice down; the sardine moulded in the
bottom will become the top of the salad. Put a ring of boned and flaked
sardines around salad and serve with mayonnaise.




Salad Sandwiches.


CHICKEN SALAD SANDWICHES.

Slightly mash chicken salad with a potato masher, mix with mayonnaise
and spread between small squares of white bread.


CAVIAR SANDWICHES.

Mix caviar with Lemon Dressing (minus the salt), spread between buttered
slices of white bread dotted with small flakes of lettuce.


ANCHOVY SANDWICHES.

Mince truffles and olives finely, mash with anchovies and spread on
slice of white bread; butter another slice and put sandwich together
with a leaf of lettuce dipped in French dressing.


PIMENTO SANDWICHES.

Peel a Pullman loaf of white bread and slice in medium slices. Spread
the top of one slice with Red Mayonnaise mixed with mashed tomato, the
lower side of the next slice with slightly melted butter, the top of the
same slice with the Red Mayonnaise mixture and so on until you have four
slices, the top slice to be spread with butter only on the under side.
Of course this leaves nothing on the outside of either the top or bottom
slice. Stack four slices, gently press together and wrap in oil paper
until needed. Slice crossways and carefully lay on sandwich plate.


PEPPER SANDWICHES.

Follow the same directions given for pimento sandwiches using Green
Mayonnaise instead of Red.


YELLOW MAYONNAISE SANDWICHES.

Make in the same way as the two preceding recipes using Deep Yellow
Mayonnaise mixed with finely ground nuts. The three kinds of sandwiches
served together on a large tray look very attractive.


SARDINE SANDWICHES.

Bone sardines, mash, sprinkle with paprika, mix with Lemon Dressing and
spread on slices of white bread. Tear lettuce into small pieces with the
fingers, dot it over the slices and cover with a buttered slice of
bread; press together slightly and cut into any desired shape.


PEARL ONION SANDWICHES.

Butter white bread, cover with minced pearl onion pickles, then a
lettuce leaf, spread with mayonnaise and top with a plain slice of
bread. Slightly press together, trim, and cut in any desired shape.


ONION SANDWICHES.

Prepare white onions by directions in Pointers, mince finely and mix
with French dressing. Put between slices of buttered bread, cut from a
Pullman loaf. Cut each sandwich into three slices, making narrow, long
sandwiches. These are also nice made in the same way, using salt and
pepper instead of French dressing.


PEANUT SANDWICHES.

Mix peanut butter with mayonnaise, spread on thin slices of white bread,
dot over with small pieces of endive and cover with a piece of buttered
bread. Roll, and wrap separately in oil paper. When served unwrap and
slip each sandwich into a green pepper ring. Select small, long green
peppers and cut into rings.


SALMON SANDWICHES.

Sprinkle finely minced salmon with cayenne, mixed with chopped celery
and olives. Add mayonnaise and spread on white bread with lettuce leaf
between.


HAM SALAD SANDWICHES.

Mix potato salad with a little mayonnaise and chow chow pickle chopped
finely; mash all together and spread on thin slices of cold boiled ham.
Butter a thin slice of white bread, lay the slice of ham on it, cover
with a lettuce leaf, trim and roll. Wrap each separately in oil paper
until ready to serve, unwrap and tie with white baby ribbon. These have
to be made very carefully. Slice the ham very thin and mash the salad
smoothly, using very little.


BEEF SALAD SANDWICHES.

Make by recipe for ham salad sandwiches, spreading thin slices of cold
roast beef with tomatoes mashed with Green Mayonnaise instead of potato
salad.




Index.


  Important Pointers,                            5-7


  SALAD DRESSINGS.

  Cooked White Salad Dressing,                     9
  Cooked Yellow Salad Dressing,                    9
  Deep Yellow Mayonnaise,                         11
  French Dressing,                                10
  Green Mayonnaise,                               11
  Lemon Dressing,                                  9
  Lemon Jelly,                                    12
  Mayonnaise No. 1,                               10
  Mayonnaise No. 2,                               11
  Mayonnaise Plain,                               10
  Nut Dressing,                                   10
  Red Mayonnaise,                                 11
  Roquefort Dressing,                             12


  DINNER SALADS.

  Asparagus Salad,                                15
  Avocado Pear Salad,                             14
  Bell Pepper Salad,                              14
  Cabbage Salad,                                  17
  Cauliflower Salad,                              17
  Celery Salad,                                   16
  Celery Stick Salad No. 1,                       15
  Celery Stick Salad No. 2,                       16
  Cucumber Salad,                                 16
  Endive Salad,                                   13
  Florida Salad,                                  18
  Green Pea Salad,                                15
  Lettuce Heart Salad No. 1,                      13
  Lettuce Heart Salad No. 2,                      13
  Lettuce Salad,                                  13
  Malaga Salad,                                   13
  Mammee-Sapota Salad,                            18
  Radish Salad,                                   17
  Romaine Salad,                                  14
  Spinach Salad,                                  17
  Strawberry Salad,                               18
  String Bean Salad,                              15
  Tomato Cups,                                    14
  Tomato Jelly,                                   16


  LUNCHEON SALADS.

  Avocado Pear Salad,                             19
  Banana Salad,                                   26
  Cheese and Nut Salad,                           25
  Chicken Aspic Salad,                            20
  Chicken Salad,                                  21
  Cocoanut Salad,                                 28
  Crab Salad,                                     22
  Cucumber Boats,                                 24
  Egg Lilies,                                     21
  Grapefruit Salad,                               25
  Guava Salad,                                    28
  Kippered Herring Salad,                         23
  Kumquat Salad,                                  27
  Lemon and Tomato Salad,                         27
  Lobster Salad,                                  23
  Loquat Salad,                                   27
  Mango Salad,                                    27
  Orange Baskets,                                 26
  Orange Salad,                                   25
  Oyster Salad,                                   19
  Pineapple Salad,                                24
  Potato Rose Salad,                              24
  Potato Salad,                                   23
  Roast Beef Salad,                               23
  Salad in Apple Cases,                           26
  Salad in Grapefruit Hulls,                      25
  Salmon Salad,                                   22
  Sardine Eggs,                                   20
  Shrimp Salad,                                   22
  Tangerine Salad,                                25
  Tomato Jelly Salad,                             28
  Tuna Salad,                                     19
  Turkey Salad,                                   19


  BRIDGE SALADS.

  Banana Salad,                                   32
  Bird’s Nest Salad,                              32
  Cabbage Palmetto Salad,                         31
  Golden-Rod Salad,                               31
  Grapefruit Jelly,                               30
  Grapefruit and Pineapple Salad,                 29
  Lettuce and Mayonnaise,                         29
  Porcupine Salad,                                32
  Salmon Salad,                                   31
  Sapodillo Salad,                                31
  Sardines in Lemon Jelly,                        33
  Tomato Lily,                                    30


  SALAD SANDWICHES.

  Anchovy Sandwiches,                             35
  Beef Salad Sandwiches,                          38
  Caviar Sandwiches,                              35
  Chicken Salad Sandwiches,                       35
  Ham Salad Sandwiches,                           37
  Onion Sandwiches,                               36
  Peanut Sandwiches,                              37
  Pearl Onion Sandwiches,                         36
  Pepper Sandwiches,                              36
  Pimento Sandwiches,                             35
  Salmon Sandwiches,                              37
  Sardine Sandwiches,                             36
  Yellow Mayonnaise Sandwiches,                   36




RECIPES.


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

preceeding=> preceding {pg 36}







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Florida Salads, by Frances Barber Harris

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLORIDA SALADS ***

***** This file should be named 49803-0.txt or 49803-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/8/0/49803/

Produced by WebRover, Chris Curnow, Chuck Greif and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
