The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Napoleon Bonaparte, Serial No.
38, by Ida M. Tarbell

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Mentor: Napoleon Bonaparte, Serial No. 38

Author: Ida M. Tarbell

Release Date: August 29, 2015 [EBook #49810]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: NAPOLEON BONAPARTE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charlie Howard, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE MENTOR

SERIAL NUMBER 38

[Illustration]




NAPOLEON BONAPARTE

BY

IDA M. TARBELL

_Author of “Short Life of Napoleon Bonaparte,” “He Knew Lincoln,” etc._

EMPEROR NAPOLEON · BRIDGE AT ARCOLE · FRIEDLAND--1807 ·

RETREAT FROM MOSCOW · ABOARD THE BELLEROPHON · ST. HELENA


Nobody who has lived in modern times has so stirred up the world as
Napoleon Bonaparte. Nobody has upset so many old things, and started
so many new ones. No man ever lived who had more faith in his own
powers--and less respect for those of other men. Napoleon had, too,
an unusual combination of those personal qualities which excite and
interest men. It is nearly a hundred years since he dropped out of
active life; but his story is more rather than less thrilling as time
goes on.

There was nothing in his birth or schooling or his first activities in
life to lead one to expect an unusual career. His family was poor and
servile; his father trading on his name and his acquaintances to feed,
educate, and place his family. The most promising thing about young
Bonaparte was his resentment of this servility and his own flat refusal
to participate in it to help himself. Throughout his boyhood in the
island of Corsica, where he was born in 1769, during the six years he
spent at school in France and the eight years of intermittent military
service that followed his first appointment at the age of sixteen to
a second lieutenancy, he lived a tempestuous inner life. Ambition
for himself, devotion to his family, love for Corsica, hatred of
France, sympathy for the new ideas of human rights that were stirring
Europe,--these sentiments kept the mind and heart of the young officer
in tumult and made him waver between allegiance to the land in which
he was born and the land that had trained him; between the career of
a soldier that was his passion and a career of money making, in order
to educate his brothers, settle his sisters, and put his mother into a
secure position.


NAPOLEON THE OPPORTUNIST

It is quite fair, I think, to characterize his early career as that of
an adventurer. He was watching for a chance, and had determined to take
it, regardless of where it offered itself. It was at a moment when he
was in disgrace for having refused the orders of his superiors in the
army that the chance he wanted came.

[Illustration: LÆTITIA BONAPARTE

The Mother of Napoleon.]

The convention in which at that moment the French government centered
was attacked by the revolting Parisians. Bonaparte had no particular
sympathy with the convention,--in fact, he had more with the
rebels,--but when one of his friends in the government who knew his
ability as an artillery officer asked him to take charge of the force
protecting the Tuilleries, where the convention sat, he accepted--with
hesitation; but, having accepted, he did his work with a skill and
daring that earned him his first important command, that of general in
chief of the French Army of the Interior. Four months later he was made
commander in chief of the Army of Italy, the army that was disputing
the conquest of northern Italy with Austria.


THE ITALIAN CAMPAIGN

[Illustration: WHERE AN EMPEROR WAS BORN

In this room Napoleon was born in 1769.]

It was a ragged, disgusted, and half-revolting body, this Army of
Italy, one that for three years had been conspicuous mainly for
inactivity. Without waiting even for shoes, the new commander started
it out swiftly on a campaign that for clever strategy, for rapidity of
movement, for dash and courage in attack, was unlike anything Europe
had ever seen. In less than two months he drove his opponents from
Lombardy and had shut up the remnant of their army in Mantua. The
Austrians shortly had a new army in the field. It took eight months to
defeat it and capture Mantua; but it was accomplished in that period.
Austria then called her ablest general, Archduke Charles, and gave him
one hundred thousand men with which to avenge her disasters. With half
the number Bonaparte advanced to meet the archduke, and drove him step
by step to Vienna.

After a year and seven months of campaigning General Bonaparte, now
twenty-eight years old, signed his first treaty. By that treaty he
formed a new republic in northern Italy and made a new eastern frontier
for France. Before the treaty, however, he had filled her empty
treasury, had loaded her down with works of art, and had given her a
new place in Europe; a place that he had proved he could sustain.

The glory of the Italian campaign thrilled the French people; but
it disturbed the politicians in power. Bonaparte saw that if the
government could manage it he would have no further opportunities for
distinguishing himself. It was this sense that led him to urge that
England, the only nation then in arms against France, be attacked by
invading Egypt. The government consented promptly. It was a way of
disposing of Bonaparte. What the government did not dream, of course,
was that Bonaparte with this army hoped to found an oriental kingdom of
which he should be the ruler.

But nothing went as he expected. He suffered terrible reverses, which
he knew the government at home was using to break his hold on the
people; his supplies and information were cut off; his prestige in his
own army weakened; his faith in his destiny was shaken. That the effect
of this bad fortune was not more than skin deep was clear enough when
he accidentally learned that things were in a very bad way in France,
that much of what he had gained in Italy had been lost, and that
Austria and Russia were preparing an invasion.

[Illustration: BIRTHPLACE OF NAPOLEON

In this house, on the little island of Corsica, the first emperor of
France spent his boyhood.]


FIRST CONSUL OF FRANCE

Promptly and secretly Bonaparte slipped out of Egypt, and before the
powers at home knew of his intention he was in France and the people
were welcoming him as their deliverer. He was ready to be just that. It
was no great trick for a man of his daring and sagacity, adored by the
populace, to overturn a discredited and inefficient government and make
himself dictator. It was done in a few weeks, and France had a new form
of government, a consulate, of which the head was a first consul, and
Bonaparte was the first consul.

The most brilliant and fruitful four years of Napoleon Bonaparte’s
life followed; for it was then that he set out to bring order and
peace to a country demoralized and exhausted by generations of
plundering by privileged classes, followed by a decade of revolution
against privileges. France needed new machinery of all kinds, and this
Bonaparte undertook to supply. There were many people who regarded him
as a great general; but to their amazement he now proved himself a
remarkable statesman.


NAPOLEON THE STATESMAN

He attacked the question of the national income like a veteran
financier. The first matter was reorganizing taxation. He succeeded in
distributing the burden more justly than had ever been known in France.
The taxes were fixed so that each knew what he had to pay, and the
inordinate graft that tax collectors and police had enjoyed was cut
off. New financial institutions were devised; among them the Bank of
France. The economy he instituted in the government, the army, his own
household, everywhere that his power extended, was rigid and minute; as
he personally examined all accounts, there was no escape. The waste and
parasitism that pervaded the country began to give way for the first
time since the Revolution.

[Illustration: EMPRESS JOSEPHINE

From a painting by Pierre Paul Prud’hon.]

Industries of all kinds had sickened in the long period of war.
Bonaparte undertook their revival by one of the most severe
applications ever made of the doctrine of protection,--he even
attempted to make his women folk wear no goods not made in France!
His interest in agriculture was as keen as in manufacturing, and
his personal suggestions and interference of the same nature. The
prosperity of the country was stimulated greatly by the public works
Bonaparte undertook. One can go nowhere in France today without finding
them. It was he who set the country at road building. Some of the most
magnificent highways in Europe were laid out by him, including those
over four Alpine passes. He paid great attention to improving harbors.
Those now at Cherbourg, Havre, and Nice, as well as at Flushing and
Antwerp, Bonaparte planned and began. As for Paris, his ambition for
the city was boundless. He was responsible for some of her finest
features and monuments.

His greatest civil achievement was undoubtedly the codification of the
laws, and it was the one of which he was proudest. That he contributed
much to the Code Napoleon besides the driving power that insisted that
it be promptly put through, there is no doubt. His great contribution
was the inestimable one of commonsense. He had no patience with
meaningless precedents, conventions, and technicalities. He wanted laws
that everybody could understand and would recognize as necessary and
just.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AS FIRST CONSUL]

Nothing more daring was undertaken in this period by Bonaparte than his
reëstablishment of the Catholic Church and his recall of thousands of
members of the old régime driven out of the country by the Revolution.
It was an attempt to reconcile and restore the two most powerful
enemies of the Revolution, the two that the first consul knew Europe
would never cease to fight to restore to power. There was of course
great opposition in radical and republican circles to both ventures.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON BONAPARTE

From the painting by Delaroche.]

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT OF ARTILLERY

From a painting of Napoleon by Greuse.]

[Illustration: KING OF ROME

From a painting by Sir Thomas Lawrence of the unfortunate little son
of Napoleon and Marie Louise. His unhappy story is told by the French
dramatist Rostand, in the play “L’Aiglon.”]


EMPEROR OF THE FRENCH

What Napoleon aimed at was to fit together all the different elements
that had made France, under a government that he should direct, and
then to impose upon them all peace, industry, and loyalty. Considering
the character and history of the elements he was working with, the
degree of his success is one of the wonders of statecraft. As time went
on, however, he was subjected to more and more jealousy, criticism, and
intrigue. And as he saw his power questioned his grasp tightened. He
even began to employ the tactics of despots,--espionage, censorships,
summary punishments. The upshot of the attacks upon him and of his
determination to impose his own will was that in 1804, when he was
thirty-five years old, he had himself made emperor of the French.
I think there is no doubt that Napoleon believed that this was the
only method by which he could make the position of France in Europe
impregnable; but that he was willing to play the emperor there is no
doubt. The dream of a throne where he should rule--for the welfare and
happiness of everybody concerned, no doubt, but rule--brilliantly and
absolutely--had never left his mind since boyhood--and now it was a
fact accomplished!

The spectacle that followed is almost unbelievable. Napoleon with
perfect seriousness set about to train himself, his lovable, but vain
and unprincipled empress, Josephine, his selfish and vulgar family,
his train of rough intimates of the battlefield, to the etiquette,
ceremonies, and dignity of a court. He worked with the same energy,
attention to details, and with the same insistence on complete
obedience as when directing a campaign. The Napoleonic court achieved
real brilliance and dignity; but to those born to the purple it was
always an upstart’s court. That it was far and away more moral,
economic, and orderly, as well as more serviceable to France, counted
for little with those of the old régime.


NAPOLEON THE CONQUEROR

[Illustration: NAPOLEON AND QUEEN LOUISA OF PRUSSIA AT TILSIT]

The year after Napoleon was crowned emperor of the French (1804) he had
himself crowned king of Italy. The territory he now governed included
not only these two countries, but several Germanic states. It was an
enormous power, and the old kingdoms of Europe, England, Austria, and
Russia looked on in dismay. It was not only his power, backed as it
was by his genius, but it was the ideas he was spreading. Everywhere
he went he put his new code of laws into force, and preached, even if
he did not always practise, personal liberty, equality before the law,
religious tolerance,--ideas that many of his enemies feared more than
they did armies.

A coalition against him was inevitable, and in 1805 he took the field
again. The campaigns that followed closely in the next four years
include some of his most interesting military feats,--the battle of
Austerlitz, of which he was proudest himself; the campaign of Jena, by
which he humbled Prussia, increased French territory largely, and won
the czar of Russia as an ally; the war on Spain, which ended in his own
deserved defeat (Napoleon at St. Helena characterized his attack on
Spain as “unjust,” “cynical,” “villainous”); the campaign of Wagram,
which finally humbled his persistent enemy Austria.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON’S FAREWELL TO JOSEPHINE

For reasons of state Napoleon divorced the Empress Josephine to marry
Marie Louise, the daughter of the emperor of Austria. His last words to
the woman who loved him were: “My destiny and France demand it!”]

At the end of these four years Napoleon was himself the practical
master of Europe; the only nation not recognizing his power being
England, which was at least temporarily quiet. He had created an
empire; but what was he to do with it? He had no heir. To provide
for one he carried out a plan long considered,--he divorced Empress
Josephine and married again. The new empress was the daughter of the
old and now humbled enemy of France, the emperor of Austria. Napoleon
apparently believed that on the birth of an heir France would accept
him fully, and that Europe would cease to fear and resent his power. He
was wrong. He had stripped too many of wealth and position, outraged
too many social and religious conventions, set in motion too many
ideas hostile to those that Europe as a whole lived by. His demands on
subjects and allies were too heavy, and particularly the one that he
had most at heart,--that no continental nation should allow a dollar’s
worth of England’s goods to cross its borders. His punishment of those
who displeased him and disobeyed his orders was too severe. A revolt
against his monstrous assumption was inevitable.

[Illustration: NAPOLEON BONAPARTE

From a portrait of the Emperor painted by Paul Delaroche.]


THE SETTING STAR

[Illustration: THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO]

It was with his ally, Russia, that the first break came. That Napoleon
was startled by the idea of war with Alexander and sought to prevent
it, is certain; but Alexander refused to yield to his demand that the
embargo against English goods be enforced. The embargo he had set
down as the “fundamental law of the Empire.” There was nothing to do
but settle it by arms, and in the summer of 1812, with an army of
over half a million men, he began a reluctant and hesitating march
against Russia. It was a campaign of terrible disasters. The Russians
retreated before him, letting cold and hunger do the work of battles.
So effectively did they work that the French army was practically
destroyed. The Russian campaign is one of the most appalling in
history. It was but the beginning of his overthrow. Alexander raised
the cry “Deliver Europe!” Stein and other liberal minds rallied the
youth of the German states into a league, pledged to fight for
national freedom. His allies and dependences began to demand the return
of lost territories as a price of loyalty. France revolted at the
prospects of continued bloodshed. The campaigns thrust upon him by all
these forces were fought; but frequently without his old genius.

It was June of 1812 when Napoleon began the Russian campaign.
Twenty-one months later Paris capitulated to his allied enemies, and a
few weeks later he had lost the greatest empire modern Europe had seen
gathered under one man, and was an exile in the little island of Elba.

[Illustration: LONGWOOD

Napoleon’s residence during his captivity at St. Helena.

AN EXILE’S GRAVE

The spot where Napoleon was buried in May, 1821. His body was removed
to Paris in 1840.]


WATERLOO AND ST. HELENA

His dramatic escape from Elba; the scurry out of France at news of
his arrival of all who had opposed him, leaving the coast practically
clear for him; the rally of the army and people to him; the immediate
attack upon him by the allied powers of Europe; his defeat at Waterloo
and speedy exile to St. Helena,--these make perhaps the most dramatic
succession of events in all history, and it was not he who lost by the
record of them, though it ended in his captivity. Napoleon a prisoner
on an island six hundred miles from land was Napoleon still. He was
there because of his conquerors’ fear of him. No greater tribute to
one man’s power was ever paid than that of Europe when under English
leadership she consented to confine Napoleon Bonaparte on the island of
St. Helena. It was all that was needed to impress him forever on the
world as one of heroic mold.


    SUPPLEMENTARY READING.--“Short Life of Napoleon Bonaparte,”
    Ida M. Tarbell; “The First Napoleon,” John C. Ropes; “Napoleon
    Bonaparte, First Campaign,” H. H. Sargent; “Life of Napoleon,”
    Las Casas; “Napoleon, the Last Phase,” Lord Rosebery; “Letters
    and Papers of Napoleon”; “Napoleana,” Frédéric Masson.




THE MENTOR

ISSUED SEMI-MONTHLY BY

The Mentor Association, Inc.

381 Fourth Ave., New York, N. Y.

  Vol. 1      No. 38

    ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION, FOUR DOLLARS. SINGLE COPIES TWENTY CENTS.
    FOREIGN POSTAGE, SEVENTY-FIVE CENTS EXTRA. CANADIAN POSTAGE,
    FIFTY CENTS EXTRA. ENTERED AT THE POST OFFICE AT NEW YORK,
    N. Y., AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER.


_Editorial_

For some time past we have felt that the cover of The Mentor has been
of rather a “severe and formal” cut, and that it would be well for us
to adopt a design that was composed of lines that were somewhat more
gracious and flowing.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have chosen this cover after a number of experiments. It has not
been an easy matter to settle. The Mentor, as we have stated more than
once, is not simply a magazine. It does not call for the usual magazine
cover treatment. What we have always wanted and have always sought for
from the beginning has been a cover that would express, in the features
of its design, the quality of the publication. In the endeavor to make
clear by dignified design the educational value and importance of The
Mentor, the tendency would be to lead on to academic severity--and
that we desire least of all. On the other hand, it would be manifestly
inappropriate to wear a coat of many colors. The position of The Mentor
in the field of publication is peculiar--its interest unique. How best
could its character be expressed in decorative design?

       *       *       *       *       *

We believe that Mr. Edwards has given us in the present cover a fitting
expression of the character of The Mentor. It is unusual in its
lines--that is, for a periodical. It has the quality of a fine book
cover design--at least so we think. It will, we believe, invite readers
of taste and intelligence to look inside The Mentor, and as experience
has taught us, an introduction to The Mentor usually leads on to
continued acquaintance.

       *       *       *       *       *

We want The Mentor to be regarded as a companion. It has often been
said that books are friends. We give you in The Mentor the good things
out of many books, and in a form that is easy to read and that taxes
you little for time. A library is a valuable thing to have--if you know
how to use it. But there are not many people who know how to use a
library. If you are one of those who don’t know, it would certainly be
worth your while to have a friend who could take from a large library
just what you want to know and give it to you in a pleasant way. The
Mentor can be such a friend to you.

       *       *       *       *       *

And since the word “library” has been used, let us follow that just a
bit further. The Mentor may well become _yourself_ in library form.
Does that statement seem odd? Then let us put it this way: The Mentor
is a cumulative library for you, each day, each week--a library
that grows and develops as you grow and develop--a library that has
in it just the things that you want to know and ought to know--and
nothing else. Day by day and week by week you add with each number
of The Mentor something to your mental growth. You add it as you add
to your stature--by healthy development; and the knowledge that you
acquire in this natural, agreeable way becomes a permanent possession.
You gather weekly what you want to know, and you have it in an
attractive, convenient form. It becomes thus, in every sense, _your_
library, containing the varied things that you know. And you have its
information and its beautiful pictures always ready to hand to refer to
and to refresh your mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

So in time your assembled numbers of The Mentor will represent in
printed and pictorial form the fullness of your own knowledge.




[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT ARCOLE--BY ANTOINE JEAN GROS]

    NAPOLEON AT ARCOLE, from the painting by Antoine Jean Gros,
    is the subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures
    illustrating “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

MONDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

AT THE BRIDGE AT ARCOLE


“Follow your general!” was the cry with which young Bonaparte urged his
army to victory at Arcole. He was only twenty-seven years old at the
time--and yet was commander in chief of the army of Italy. The years
that brought Napoleon into prominence had been troublous ones. He was
born in Corsica, and in moderate circumstances. The exact date of his
birth is uncertain. At school he said it was 1768. It is stated that he
gave this date because that made him a citizen of Genoa, inasmuch as
Corsica was at that time a dependency of Genoa. Later on he said that
he was born in 1769; for Corsica had then become a French possession,
and this made him a Frenchman by birth. After early schooling at
Brienne young Napoleon entered the military academy of Paris in 1784.
After a year he was commissioned as a sublieutenant in the regular
army, and made rapid progress from the start. As lieutenant colonel he
distinguished himself in the wars of Spain. He held the mobs boldly and
in masterful manner during the turbulent scenes in the early days of
the Revolution. Barras, a high official, recognized his military genius
and gave Bonaparte command of the army of Italy.

The capture of the bridge at Arcole was essential to the success of the
Italian campaign. For three days the Austrian army gallantly opposed
the attacks of Napoleon’s forces, and it was only by the personal
courage of the young general that victory was finally won. Bonaparte
personally led a rush across the bridge at Arcole, and he was the real
vital force in the battle. He saw his staff killed or wounded about him
during the onslaughts. Once he himself was swept by a counter attack of
the Austrian forces into a swamp, where he nearly perished.

Napoleon’s army consisted of 18,000 men, which he had moved over the
narrow and rugged roads with heavy baggage at a rate of fourteen miles
a day for three consecutive days,--the same rate at which Stonewall
Jackson made his marches through the Shenandoah Valley. It was a
remarkable achievement under the conditions Napoleon had to face.

And with this force he met an Austrian army of 40,000 and defeated it
signally after a bitter engagement.

  COPYRIGHT, 1913, BY THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION, INC.




[Illustration: EMPEROR NAPOLEON--BY FRANCOIS GÉRARD]

    EMPEROR NAPOLEON, from the painting by François Gérard, is the
    subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating
    “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

TUESDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

EMPEROR NAPOLEON


“I shall now give myself to the administration of France.” That was
the statement of Napoleon Bonaparte in 1802 after he had overthrown
the government and had instituted a consulate, to which he was elected
first for ten years, and then for life. There were three consuls, and
Napoleon was known as the first consul. To one of his sublime ambition,
however, the thought of association in government was unbearable. Two
years later, despite his attitude expressed in his own words, “I am a
friend of the Republic; I am a son of the Revolution; I stand for the
principles of liberty, equality, and fraternity,” Napoleon determined
to make an office for himself that would be absolute and hereditary.
The title of king had grown hateful to the people of France; so
Napoleon chose “emperor” instead, and in 1804 he assumed the title and
the office.

Many were shocked; but none could resist his assumption of imperial
power. A popular vote showed that only 2,500 people opposed the new
government. Pope Pius VII accepted Napoleon’s request to take part in
the coronation ceremony on December 2, 1804. The event occurred at
Notre Dame Cathedral. The pope poured the mystic oil on the head of
the kneeling sovereign. It was ten centuries since any pope had left
Rome for a coronation, and in the minds of the Latin peoples this was
a consecration of a monarch that put him on an equal plane with the
proudest rulers of Europe, whose power reposed on the basis of Divine
Right. When the pope lifted the crown Napoleon performed an act so
striking in its originality that the people held their breath. He took
the crown from the pope’s hands and placed it on his own head. He then
crowned Empress Josephine.

A few months later Napoleon journeyed to Milan, the capital of what
was called the Cisalpine Republic, and there proclaimed the kingdom of
Italy. He crowned himself then with “the iron crown of the Lombards”
and named Prince Eugène, his stepson, heir to the throne.

During the ceremonies the republic of Genoa sent ambassadors to Paris
with the request to be incorporated into the French empire. This
offended Austria, and led to the third war with that empire since 1792,
when the republic of France was proclaimed.




[Illustration: FRIEDLAND--“1807”--BY MEISSONIER]

    FRIEDLAND--“1807,” from the painting by Meissonier, is the
    subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating
    “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

WEDNESDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

FRIEDLAND--“1807”


Emperor Napoleon’s brilliant victory at Friedland was the event that
placed him at the topmost height of his military power. In a fierce
battle, noted for the strategy characteristic of Bonaparte, he defeated
a large Russian army. This was on June 14, 1807.

Czar Alexander of Russia had refused to comply with the demands of
Napoleon regarding trade with England. England would not recognize
Napoleon as emperor, and he retorted by forcing several of the European
nations to sever commercial connections with England. Czar Alexander
held out. The forces of both emperors met at a small town called
Heilsberg, near Friedland. Napoleon disposed his army in such a way
that he led the Russian general, Bennigsen, to believe that he had to
conquer only a small number at Friedland. Part of the French army was
hidden in the semi-circle of wooded hills that surrounded Friedland.

From one of these hills Napoleon watched the movement of Bennigsen and
his army of 30,000. The Russian general believed that a corps of 1,500
men in command at Lannes, stationed at Friedland, was the extent of the
forces opposing him. Bennigsen engaged in a skirmish with this corps,
and drove it back into the city. The Russian army then followed, and
crossed the River Albe. Napoleon waited, feeling assured that Bennigsen
would not have time to retreat. Then he brought his army of 60,000 men
to the aid of Lannes, and surrounded the Russians, pouring upon them
a converging fire which worked disastrous results. The fragments of
Bennigsen’s army retreated to the Russian border, whither Napoleon’s
forces pursued them.

At the Russian frontier Napoleon received a communication from Czar
Alexander requesting peace. It was agreed that the two emperors should
meet on a floating raft near the city of Tilsit.

The result of this conference was the foundation of what has been
called “Napoleon’s dream to build a vast European empire.”

Whatever may be said of that, it was surely the beginning of his
downfall.




[Illustration: NAPOLEON IN THE CAMPAIGN OF FRANCE--BY
MEISSONIER]

    RETREAT FROM MOSCOW, from the painting by Meissonier, is the
    subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures illustrating
    “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

THURSDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

RETREAT FROM MOSCOW


Napoleon’s invasion of Russia was one of the most disastrous military
enterprises in the history of the world. It was not the Russians that
defeated the emperor. During much of his advance he was left alone.
Sometimes he was harrassed by skirmish forces. Several great battles
were fought, notably that of Borodino. But for the most part he was
allowed to go on his way; for his enemies knew that he had greater
than human forces to face and battle with,--the vast Russian solitudes
and the cruel, killing Russian winter. The terrible story is summed
up in the statement that Napoleon invaded Russia with an armed force
numbering more than 500,000 men, and that he returned with less than
30,000.

Bonaparte had once said, “I will never lead an army to destruction as
did Charles XII on the steppes of Russia. My soldiers are my children.”
However, when Czar Alexander of Russia refused to accept his terms,
Napoleon assembled his grand army of Frenchmen, Italians, Austrians,
and Germans and invaded Russia as far as Moscow, a distance of 2,000
miles from Paris.

He was victorious at Moscow; but the Russians burned the city, and
thus destroyed it for purposes of winter quarters. The czar delayed
in his negotiations for peace so long that Napoleon was compelled to
order a retreat, which began on October 19, 1812. His army was then
harassed from the rear, and many lives were lost in these engagements.
After two weeks of marching the soldiers met the first wave of Russian
winter. The roads were frozen sheets of ice, and in a week nearly all
the horses perished. The cavalry could no longer ward off the attacks
of Cossacks. Many of the guns had to be abandoned. The army lacked the
artillery necessary to fight a big battle. Food supplies had to be
abandoned, as there were no horses to draw them. Thousands stretched
out by the fire at night never to awaken in the morning. Cold and
starvation killed them.

At Smolensk the army presented an appalling spectacle. Napoleon headed
it, clad in furs, his expression set and stern. Behind him came the
captains, majors, and lieutenants, then a few harnessed wagons with the
emperor’s war chest and papers; after that the straggling forces, many
of them unarmed, limping, half frozen, some wandering away with wild
looks, others falling by the roadside never to rise again.

At the frontier Napoleon left this pitiful fragment of an army in
charge of the king of Naples, took a horse, and rode to Paris.




[Illustration: NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE BELLEROPHON--BY W. Q.
ORCHARDSON]

    NAPOLEON ON BOARD THE BELLEROPHON, from the painting by W.
    Q. Orchardson, is the subject of one of the intaglio-gravure
    pictures illustrating “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

FRIDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

ON BOARD THE BELLEROPHON


The Battle of Waterloo, June 18, 1815, was the final blow to Napoleon’s
power. On that day hung the fate of Europe. Napoleon faced the
allied forces of Prussia, England, Germany, and the Dutch, and had
assembled an army of 70,000 to meet them. The allied forces were under
command of the Duke of Wellington. They were bound together by one
stern purpose,--to annihilate once for all the man whom they called
the scourge of Europe. A heavy rainstorm prevented the emperor from
carrying out his original plan of attack, which was to meet the enemy
in two sections. The night of June 17 was stormy. A heavy rainstorm
made the roads so heavy that the emperor could not move his cannon
into the place desired until a short time before the enemy’s forces
joined. Then, too, General Grouchy had been instructed to intercept the
Prussian forces under Blücher, and hold them back while Napoleon fought
his fight with Wellington. If he could not do that, he was at least to
follow Blücher to Waterloo. The arrival, therefore, of Blücher and his
forces in good fighting trim put the French into such confusion that a
crushing defeat was inevitable. In the rout men had to save themselves
as best they could.

Napoleon left the field, and took the road to Paris, where he found
his power gone. He resigned as emperor in favor of his son, and went
to Rochefort in hope of finding a ship going to the United States. The
English vessel Bellerophon blockaded the harbor, and Napoleon boarded
it, throwing himself on the mercy of Great Britain. He reckoned,
however, without his host; for England had never forgotten that
Napoleon had threatened an invasion of Great Britain. Moreover, within
the year Napoleon had been declared an international outlaw, “outside
the pale of social and civil relations, and liable to public vengeance.”

So, as Napoleon crossed the English Channel from Rochefort to
Portsmouth, with Captain Maitland, on board his Majesty’s ship
Bellerophon, he had sought safety in the lion’s mouth. England assumed
charge of him on behalf of all Napoleon’s European enemies, and
consigned him to exile on the island of St. Helena.




[Illustration: NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA--BY PAUL DELAROCHE]

    NAPOLEON AT ST. HELENA, from the painting by Paul Belaroche,
    is the subject of one of the intaglio-gravure pictures
    illustrating “Napoleon Bonaparte.”

SATURDAY DAILY READING IN THE MENTOR COURSE

PREPARED BY THE EDITORIAL STAFF OF THE MENTOR ASSOCIATION

AT ST. HELENA


On a rock-bound island in the South Atlantic the greatest military
genius of all time spent the last six years of his life. There
Napoleon dragged out the months in company with a number of his former
associates, recalling the glories of the past and complaining of the
bitter conditions of the present. There he wrote interesting memorial
papers and gave expression to the ripe results of his military training.

Sir Hudson Lowe, a British military officer with little tact or
diplomacy, was his jailer. It was not possible for such a man and
Napoleon Bonaparte to meet on terms of amity. Writers on the subject
differ, as they do on almost all the episodes of Napoleon’s life. Some
say that Sir Hudson abused and insulted Napoleon shamefully. However,
there are French writers who try to prove that Napoleon continually
lied to and intrigued against the governor.

Napoleon’s mind during these days turned frequently toward his son,
“the little king of Italy,” and he dictated many instructions as to the
boy’s future. It might have been with the hope that at some future time
an empire might come to his son that he also dictated those elaborate
memoirs in which he gave an account of himself.

During a terrific storm of wind and rain on the night of May 5, 1821,
Napoleon died. The dash of the waves and the roar of the storm seemed
to stir his fading faculties and to arouse in him a memory of the din
of battle; for his last words were “Tête d’armée” (the head of the
army), and with that ejaculation in a sharp military tone his lips
closed forever.

He was buried near his favorite haunt,--a fountain shaded by weeping
willows, at Longwood, the estate on which he had lived at St. Helena.
British soldiers accompanied his body to rest with reversed arms and
fired a parting salute over his grave.

In his will the following extraordinary statement appeared: “My wish
is to be buried on the banks of the Seine, in the midst of the French
people, whom I so dearly loved.”

In 1840 his body was ceremoniously transferred to Paris and buried in
the Hôtel des Invalides with every circumstance of military pomp and
national mourning.




Transcriber’s Notes


Simple typographical errors were corrected; punctuation, hyphenation,
and spelling were made consistent when a predominant preference was
found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mentor: Napoleon Bonaparte, Serial
No. 38, by Ida M. Tarbell

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MENTOR: NAPOLEON BONAPARTE ***

***** This file should be named 49810-0.txt or 49810-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/8/1/49810/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charlie Howard, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

