The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems & Poèmes, by Natalie Clifford Barney

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Poems & Poèmes
       autres alliances

Author: Natalie Clifford Barney

Release Date: September 12, 2015 [EBook #49942]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & POÈMES ***




Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)





POEMS & POÈMES

autres alliances

Par

NATALIE CLIFFORD BARNEY


ÉMILE-PAUL FRÈRES
ÉDITEURS A PARIS

GEORGE H. DORAN Co
ÉDITORS NEW-YORK

1920




    CONTENTS


    Apology
    Ah! Night
    The Love of Judas
    The Weeping Venus
    More Night!
    The Phantom Guest
    Double Being
    Singing
    On a Picture to Music
    Loves Comrades
    With two dwarf Japanese maples
    Avertissement
    The Flute-Player
    A Parisian Roof Garden in 1918
    How Write the Beat of Love
    A la Campagne
    A Pilgrimage
    Backward
    A Sonnet to My Lady with the Jaundice
    Easter Day
    Lines taken from Poems I shall not write
    I Built a Fire
    How Cold
    Habit
    The Near Enemy
    Life




    APOLOGY


    While blue and khaki share the heroes mud,
    And women tend in white or weep in grey,
    Though all expressiveness seems over-dressed,
    Yet some must wear the colours of their hearts
    Upon their sleeves, like troubadours, of old;
    And sing, and sometimes write their singing down.

    ... To "chase them from republics" were as vain
    As to disturb the hurdy-gurdy man.
    Let him go grinding music as he likes;
    You see him turn his wheel, but need not hear
    The tune he's playing in the noisy street?...

    (Some have an organ, some an axe to grind,
    While others seek how best to bury hatchets.)
    We all are poets in our different ways
    And may your dreams be harmless as my own.






    AH! NIGHT!


    Ah! night!
    To feel the stab of beauty at the heart!
    To drink, with lifted throat,
    The silent throb and music of the stars,
    The first kiss of the spring on spell-bound trees,
    To stretch out arms to hold and soothe the world,
    --A love too vast in aught to be contained,
    Helpless and great: a poets youthfulness,...

    Alone, might all this emptiness be you!

                              _May first 1915_






    THE LOVE OF JUDAS


    Love, take me back to you, and make me whole,
    Who am divided and in unbelief:
    An infidel in thought and word and grief,
    A double heart and a promiscuous soul!

    And what if Judas offered Christ that bowl
    Of greatest bitterness without relief.
    Revenge, not silver, tempted such a thief:
    Betrayed betrayer of the kiss he stole.

    He loved the most; those others loved but well,
    They drowsed: in dreadful paths his anguish trod,
    Nor thrice denied the love that sold his God.

    No pity for his throbbing jealous side,
    No pity for his false obscure farewell;
    Yet he alone for his lost master died!






    THE WEEPING VENUS


    by Romaine


    Laid out as dead in moonlight shroud
    Beneath a derelict of cloud:
    A double wreckage safe from flight,
    High-caged as grief, in prisoned night.--
    Unseeing eyes whose clustering tears
    Tell the pure crystal of her years.--
    No crown of thorns, no wounded side,
    Yet as the God-man crucified,
    Her body expiates the sin
    That love and life with her begin!






    MORE NIGHT!


    Moon-love, star-love, the love of silver water.
    The weeping face of love touched in the dark,
    And murdered joy, lost souls of joy that caught her
            A glow-worm's warmth and spark.

    Birds of prey, invisible, now hover
    About her midnights hammocked in unrest--
    A moving shadow, faithless as a lover,
            Is all her arms have pressed--

    Too luminous the dreaming of the sleeper
    Whose tears are prophecies and second-sight.
    Has death no under-sea, no darkness deeper,
            In which to satiate our need of night?






    THE PHANTOM GUEST


    We lay in shade diaphanous
    And spoke the light that burns in us

    As in the glooming's net I caught her,
    She shimmered like reflected water!

    Romantic and emphatic moods
    Are not for her whom life eludes...

    Its vulgar tinsel round her fold?
    She'd rather shudder with the cold,

    Attend just this elusive hour,
    A shadow in a shadow bower,

    A moving imagery so fine,
    It must have been her soul near mine

    And so we blended and possessed
    Each in each the phantom guest,

    Inseparate, we scarcely met;
    Yet other love-nights we forget!






    DOUBLE BEING


    A northern mind, a face from Italy,
    A double fate lived all too fatally,
    A look fresh as a childs, both soft and sharp,
    A clarion-voice, then liquid as a harp!
    A natural being, yet from nature freed,
    Like a Shakespearean boy of fairy breed--
    A sex perplexed into attractive seeming--
    Both sex at best, the strangeness so redeeming!--
    Hands hard to loosen if for once they cling,
    Yet frail as Leicester's wearing a queen's ring.
    A page-clothed Rosalind to play a part,
    A brow of genius and a lonely heart.






    SINGING


    Ethereal vibrations
    And soulful pulsations
        Of song,
    Afloat on the air
    --More aspiring than prayer--
        How strong
    The wings that uplift!
    As soaring adrift,
        A throng
    Of angels there are,
    And an echoing star,
        As along
    You rise ever higher,
    Sole voice of a choir
        How long
    Shall we follow your flight,
    Through crystaline night,
        And belong
    --Through the high vaults of space--
    To your archangel's face,
        And long,
    --With the heavens still ringing--
    To be one with your singing?






    ON A PICTURE TO MUSIC


    Music, language of the mortal soul.
            The face of twilight,
    The mouth of bitterness made lyrical,
    Eyes closed on poignant joys that might have been!
    A profile turned to life, and yet beyond ...
    Reborn, transfigured; penetrating sense
            To gather an acute expressiveness
    Vibrant within itself: all our lost lives!
    --We must play gently to the living dead--
    Fingers outstretched, by that responsive lid
    Where Angel harps lie buried at full length,
    Yet still in touch and resonant--Arise
            To laying on of hands--
    Invisible, a phantom of pure sound
    Voices the spirit sitting there, awakes
    The sighing, and the soaring and the beat
    (O dispossessed and silenced King: my heart!)
    Until we too are echos of that tide,
    Where winds and waves become articulate,
    Our being tossed so high, beyond itself,
          Winged by the elements!
    Our human weight of woe no longer felt
                Until we meet
    --By some familiar fall of minor chords--
    The inner God of Sorrow face to face.






    LOVE'S COMRADES


    You say I've lived too long in France
    And wearied of the senses' dance?


    Like fresh air in an opium den
    You'll lead me out--to where? and when?


    .... I fear no country's ready yet
    For our complexities: forget
    The best of flesh and food to go
    A'roaming o'er the world, and know
    Discomfort's great surprises few--?
    No, let me travel just to you!






    WITH TWO DWARF JAPANESE MAPLES


    These ancient trees for your new room.
    May many happy evenings fall
    With their reflections on the wall,
    Making embroideries of the gloom,
    And let their leaves of red and green
    Rustle with small desires and fears,
    But never water them with tears
    For all that is or has not been.
    Lives pass as shadows on a screen,
    Whether you dream or sing or sew,
    Or if some time Regret instead
    Should bow, my Loveliest, your head,
    Send me a leaf so I shall know:
    For Hope the green, for Love the red.






    AVERTISSEMENT.


    _Her name begins as Love begins,_
    _Mine as "November", "Nevermore"._


    No thousand nights and one between these covers,
    No miniatures, enluminures or dyes--
    For art is but a prostitute that hovers
    To court outsiders--you alone may prize
    These pages which your idle hand unties?--


    ... Leaving art to artists--we, loves lovers,
    Keep for out-worn Beauty a disguise.
    --(A line traced round a shadow as it dies,
    Some semblance of the scattered rose recovers?)--
    So making everything seem otherwise:
    Associations are our deities!
    --And ivy leaves, transparent eggs of plovers
    Are fragments of the feast they symbolize.--


    Here, visible as sleeping Eros, lies
    A book of dreams and broken memories,
    A living past for which blind Love has eyes?






    THE FLUTE-PLAYER


    Her flute's clear solo greets the maiden day--
    Above the waking of melodious May,
    Its notes are like a trellised flight of flowers.

    The chirping birds whose orchestra of bills
    Accompanies rain--the tea-rose best distills--
    And then the smell of earth between the showers!

    From garden bright, in drops of crystal gown'd,
    I hear the breezes make a leafy sound
    Through vibrant buzz of flies that seek the shade--

    ... And wonder whether--as sweet noon reposes--
    The roses make the air, the air the roses
    Within the house kept cooler than a glade.

    Against the wall, upon the sunny side,
    Their fruitful branches fixed and crucified,
    The pear-trees stretch out arms in martyred line--

    While we that surfeit, nap, as calyx'd bees,
    Who murmurs, still pursuing imageries
    ... «Like Jewish candelabras». (relight mine!)

    Rising as to welcome a newcomer
    The flute pipes to the first eve of the summer
    --Nocturnal nature moves to minor bars--

    A golden crescent in a druid's tree
    Reminds her that the forest has a key--
    And out she goes to serenade the stars!






    A PARISIAN ROOF GARDEN IN 1918


    As I must mount to feed those doves of ours,
    Perhaps you too will spend nocturnal hours
                Upon your roof
                So high aloof
    That from its terraced bowers
    We catch at clouds and draw a bath from showers.
    Before the moon has made all pale the night,
    Let's meet with flute and viol, and supper light:
    A yew lamb, minted sauce, a raisined bun,
    A melon riper than the melting sun--
    A flask of Xeres, that we've scarce begun--
    Well try the «lunar waltz» while floats afar
    Upon the liquid night--night's nenuphar.
    Or else, with senses tuned alike perchance,
    Reclining love will make the heavens dance;
    And if the enemy from aerial cars
    Drops death, we'll share it vibrant with the stars!






    HOW WRITE THE BEAT OF LOVE


    How write the beat of love, the very throb,
    The rhythm of our veins' deep eloquence?
    How fix that darkness-rending final sob,
    That perfect swoon of each united sense.

    The full-sailed rising of your body's sweep
    --Adrift and safe on joy's last tidal wave--
    Will toss you on the silver sands of sleep,
    Forgetful of the ecstacy you gave.

    Your breath ebbs restful as the falling tide:
    A sea becalmed!... Lay me in valleyed part
    Of breasts whose undulating crests subside--
    Ah how they marked the high beats of your heart!






    A LA CAMPAGNE


    The night, whose silences detach each sound,
    The leaves, as whispering heralds in a wood,
    Stir hopes of you about my solitude.
    Was that a carriage wheel upon the ground?
    --The grassy ground that brings the road uphill
    Would muffle horses hoofs--I listen still--
    A nervous motion at my heart: the bound
    Of too responsive veins--a hush profound.

    I hear a night bird call its mate?... a hound
    Out on the farm bark at some peasant maid
    Too tired with harvesting to feel afraid.
    ... Loosed, and now tied, scenting the sunny air,
    All day she combed and tossed the fields' dim hair,
    As some mute servant tending a fair queen
    She works in beauty neither felt nor seen,
    While I have nature, all the whole earth over,
    For company. Yet anxious as a lover
    Prisoned in sentiment, I watch and start.
    Is it then just for you I live apart?
    The moon, as milk caught in a pail, now flows
    Over its rim, whit'ning the dark that glows--
    I saw your absence less by day, and less
    This summers brilliant, living emptiness.



    II


    Another day in flowered light comes through
    The curtains of the room that waits for you.
    I leave it so, to its Byronian gloom:
    In vain red roses at your casements bloom.
    The lyre-shaped clock that once struck hours of gold,
    Has stopped, the prisoned summer air turns cold.
    The mirrors that no longer see you pass,
    Seem frames without their pictures, lengths of glass
    Bored to reflect a house without expression.
    Only my mind can image the procession
    Of past realities, that flitter by
    Invisible to all. These guides and I
    Live a repeated life in which we follow
    Through the deserted rooms, through tree-topped hollow
    Roads, the joyful phantoms gone before.
    The rhododendrons hedge-like corridor,
    Must lead you, now and ever, back to me!
    As often as our eyes have sought the sea,
    I rest mine on this woodland resting-place.
    Ah when again, the blossom of your face?
    And, many times to aid the incantation,
    Seeking some proof to fix my meditation,
    I pause where the soft earth still bears the seals
    Of your once-waiting and impatient heels!
    And stoop, to find again the marks I found,
    The little marks your feet leave on the ground!






    A PILGRIMAGE.


    Is that your window with the moving shade
    In pilgrimage I've come so far to see?
    --The air may enter, you are not afraid
    Of the «great air» that plays invisibly
    About your neck, moving your opened hair
    (That busy shadow is perhaps your maid?)
    While I must wait, as near as I may be,
    Upon the sands, wishing that I were made
    Like Ariel to skip accross the sea
    Bringing you kisses, in small waves that bear
    The prostrate happy sun-flushed evening there,
    And all unseen cover you every where:
    To rise up with the tide and fall on you
    With lips that moisten, cling, and sting like spray--
    To want you, and so wanting turn away?
    Or beat my way into that prisoned hue:
    Now that your window is a golden square
    Cut in the darkness? Must I homeward fare
    With flapping cape against the wind to fight,
    Or like a sea-gull wing towards your light?

                     _D'une plage lointaine._





    BACKWARD


    /#
    "_The predominacy of custom is every
    where visible, it sounds as a man
    would wonder to hear man profess,
    protest, engage, give great words, and
    then do just as they have done before,
    as though they were dead images and
    moved only by the wheels of custom._"
                          _Francis BACON_.
    #/



    My Hopes white-plumed, in valiant mail,
    Have beaten at her heart grown pale
    --Have failed, as all proud hopes must fail--
    Lower the mast, fold up the sail.
    In vain we faced the high-winged gale
    And laughed as those whom Gods assail.
    The reefs near port now crush our bark,
    The jealous hounds of habit bark
    On land. As children in the dark
    My Lady shudders in the veil
    Of her meek hair--shall naught prevail?
    And only fears their echo find
    Within her torn and timid mind?

    Helplessly, my courage tears
    To free her of the doubts she wears
    Closer than Life.... Yet Time prepares
    The end of all things.... Melt, my tears!
    And flow as bitter as the sea
    Over my drowning Love and me!






    A SONNET


    TO MY LADY WITH THE JAUNDICE.


    Was not Titania golden? See these flowers
    Are they for being yellowish less fair?
    Apollo and the Godesses all share
    In this most glorious hue. The jealous bowers

    Of Kings are coloured thus, their reed of powers,
    Their rings, their chains, the crowns that they must wear
    Golden their mistress and their minion's hair
    Golden the bannered sun above their towers!

    Reflecting butter-cups amuses Puck
    But flower-rubbed eye-lids, and complexions mend:
    So fear not broken crystals long ill-luck

    But look in this new mirror, lovely friend.
    Both gods and fairies wait on lovers wills.
    That jaundices be changed to daffodils!






    EASTER DAY


    Much longer than these lilies, you or I,
    This book lives on mysterious memory
    Of an enchanted place to which you lent
    A fragrance that will render somnolent?
    --Sweet poisons are narcotics for our tears!
    Our ressurected past through dreams appears
    An angel standing by an empty tomb.
    What sadder thing may Time spin on her loom
    Than words?--Return to that once petaled door
    Through which Love passed--adding a few leaves more
    To the strange book of life: open its covers
    Only to the worn page where we were lovers
    Lost in fair imageries, there to forget
    Our hearts that weep as little children yet!






    LINES TAKEN FROM POEMS
    I SHALL NOT WRITE


                Love, all our colours
                Fade into shadows
                --Shadows, but empty
                Forms of the darkness?

                Pale with the spring-time,
                Wandering without you--
                Sick with love-sickness!

        To sigh upon this chill air of December,
        To wonder why, and wondering why, remember!

                As through the air
                Her little fan-shaped feet

    What beauty in the way the light fell on her eye-brows....

    These pages are as silent as drowned cries....
    Come back, my Love, and with more fervent eyes
    Than pity, Lips that bear the ivy-leaf
    Once chose for emblem Love that never dies?

        Bow thy head, O shadow on the wall,
        And weep a shadows grief.
        ... And so the rain arrived instead of you!
        Its falling tears on the seas bitterness....

        ... But I, who am loves prodigal and fool,
        What right have I to that high horse of verse?
        Whose wings in cadenced soaring sweep the sky
        Taking the waning moons for virgin dawns!
        Etherial beast to find a home in clouds
        And pasture on the plenteous voids of heaven!

        ... Small are these in love and in understanding ...
        Lift your voice in song, you alone can sing me
        Songs as white and strong as the marble columns
                       Of Mitylene

        Songs as pure pure as stars on the silver midnights,
        Near as moonbeams over the limbs of lovers,
        Strange as sleep in fields of lethean stillness
                   Heavy with summer.

        You alone can waken my soul to sorrow,
        You alone can mend all the broken music:
        Subtler tones of thought than this shattered singing
                     Words have divided!

        I cannot weep for you as others weep.
              My last and dearest dead,
        For all my tears on lesser griefs are shed!






    I BUILT A FIRE


    I built a fire to welcome her,
        And my voice sighed
    Aloud her name. To be with her
    This night, I would have died....
        Upon the hours, all in vain
        My tears, the rain,
    Fall uselessly, unceasingly....
        The heavy door
        Has closed again ... again!
    I wait, yet know she will not brave
        The midnight,--give
    One hour more, so utterly to live;
        Wise and mild and shy,
    Afraid as the heart of a child,
        I know her heart to be.
    And mine, that naught will save,
      Must love and live and crave
        And break unceasingly!






    HOW COLD ...


            How cold the autumn night,
              Fearing that never more,
                    As before,
                    Will she pour
        In with the moonlight through my door.
    --On nights when the moon over-brimmed with light
            Was like a loving-cup she bore.
            ... My love, my love's delight,
            How are you lost? How fight
                Against an angels flight?
                Tarnished upon the floor
              The halo desire kept bright!
              Like a lonely child afright
              Questions each empty fold —
            When loves fairy tales are told,
              In midnights anguish might
              My golden head turn white
              Under the moons down-pour:
            In a moment a million moons more
            Drown, chill and cover me quite ...
              Rather than feel the cold,
              The gradual growing cold--
            Make me one with the autumn night.






    HABIT


    Ah! habit, how unmusical and shy
    That outworn miracle: our ecstacy!
    Between our hands that clasp their empty palms,
    This daily prayer is this our psalm of psalms!
    What is this nothing that was more than all?
    Thinned as a golden ring that dare not fall,
    That unsuspected danger: faithfulness,
    Has linked us strangers, and a something less!
    Exchanging vows and other platitudes,
    As beggars chained in separate solitudes,
    Though jealousy keep live the rotten core,
    Lovers that were be lovers nevermore.






    THE NEAR ENEMY


    Rash games of chess do hateful lovers play,
    Their towers, queens and kings all thrown away
    In wild offensives, desperate retreats.
    To that sick inner-sounding drum that beats
    In terror of some tender thing just killed!
    New warriors on the battle-field, unskilled
    In prudent war-fare: friends of yesterday
    What they most cherished seem most keen to slay.
    More treacherous than Prussians in command,
    Entrenched and feigning not to understand,
    They plan how best to poison, maim and mar!
    Masked in bad silence, turned against their star.
    Through what black forces are so changed to foes
    Those fed on our high hearts, yes, even those!






    LIFE


                                     Life,
                           The unloosening of hands
                      --The unloosening of little hands--
                               About the heart.
                           The welling up of tears:
                       Old habits, old deaths, good-bye!
                   You are sacred ground under my on-faring,
       I shall tread so lightly that you will not feel my leave-taking?
    Yet the breath of a new world--the ever promised-land--exalts my nostrils.
                      I am on the war-path towards peace:
                          The peace of single choice.
                            Determination--onward,
                         Evolutions open your arcana,
                   Shower down your nearest spears of truth,
                Great fear throbs in me, fear that leads me on,
                        I have shut my eyes long enough
                           --Shut eyes grow blind!--
                    Clinging to just one little human life!
                 Limiting, repressing all it would not share,
                        I who had an easy world to give
                     In the first heart-beats of my hope--
               Yet now, with forty years, has come another youth
                    --A youth in which I recognize myself!
             --Myself, how long you've lingered, waited, strayed--
                    Beauty seems an empty shell--out-worn.
           Great longing of my sea, break forth, be uncontained!...
                Count not your shipwrecks--every spar may save.
                      So I, not cruelly, not impetuously,
                    But with keen, shrewd resolve--rise up.
                     Why do I rise on timid stealthy feet?
                    In the dark to take leave of the dark,
                      To kiss the eyes of night farewell,
                And turn love's withered face full on the dawn.
                        May the dawn learn through me,
                  Not tint and play with empty shadows here,
                   But raise the arch of triumph of its day.
                  ... I hear a sound as of a world on flame.
                            My past a burning city?
                              Shall I look round?
                 --Salt of my earth: all my tears crystalized!
                  You'd call me back into the phantom house?
                  --O, Psyche holding high your awkward lamp,
                  O, Psyche, loved in darkness, see the day!






    FEMME


    Femme à la souple charpente,
    Au poitrail courbe, arqué pour
    Les gémissements d'amour,
    Mon désir suivra tes pentes--
    Tes veines, branchages nains
    Où la courbe rejoint l'angle;
    jambes fermant le triangle
    Du cher coffret féminin

    --O femme, source et brûlure--

    Je renverse dans ma main
    Ta tête--sommet humain.
    Cascade ta chevelure






    TIERCE-RIME


    Sensible auprès de toi, muet comme l'enfance,
    Je t'offris la pâleur de l'été maladif
    Dans une seule rose ouverte et sans défense.

    Quelle fée ouvragea, puis unit sans motif
    Ses pétales--qu'un fil de parfum semblait joindre--
    Et que tu vins casser d'un geste trop hâtif.

    Ils tombent un par un. Je te regarde feindre
    De ne pas voir combien se seront effeuillés.
    Ah! se défaire ainsi doucement sans se plaindre!

    Et j'embrasse en silence (aveugle que tu es!)
    De larmes, de baisers, tes deux mains que je touche
    Avec mes lèvres moins qu'avec mes cils mouillés.

    Et tu repars distraite, et moi je me recouche
    Sur tout ton souvenir.... Tel un pauvre histrion,
    Je mime un rôle ardent sur ta lointaine bouche!

    Et nous pleurons ensemble ainsi que nous rions
    A l'heure passagère et vide--Ta présence,
    Amour, n'est donc jamais ce que nous voudrions?

    Quand perdras-tu sur moi ton étrange puissance?
    Mon cœur malade, ah! quand va-t-il ne plus sentir,
    Ou des yeux oublieux de la convalescence,

    Quand pourrai-je sans peur te regarder partir?






    J'AVAIS CRAINT LA NEIGE


                   J'avais craint la neige,
                   Je vous avais espérée.
                   --La neige est venue,


                          La neige,
                  Pareille à l'effeuillement
                        De ces roses.


    Soyez la première à marcher sur la blancheur des pétales
            --Fleurs du froid effeuillées par l'hiver--
               Avant que d'autres ne les écrasent.


    Les pétales tombées, les étoiles fondantes se rejoignent,
                      Dallage éphémère,
        Marquez l'empreinte de ses pieds tournés vers moi!


                   Que la neige dans ma cour,
                      Tachetée par ses pas,
                    Soit un tapis d'hermine!






    SUFFISANCE


    Quand ton regard mi-clos, luisant entre tes cils,
    Peut évoquer l'amour sans forme et sans visage,
    Tu ne rêves donc plus aux amants de passage?
    --Quelle joie égalant ton dégoût t'offrent-ils?--
    Ils rôdent tels des loups à l'affût d'une proie,
    Désirant mat ton corps que leur désir salit;
    Mais, loin d'eux, ton désir, seul maître de ton lit,
    Reste le créateur nocturne de ta joie.
    Et lorsque le désir te tient éperdûment
    Livrée, et qu'il te rend plus ardente et plus souple,
    Lorsque ton être double, à la fois ton amant
    Et ta maîtresse, sait te prendre, mieux qu'un couple
    Tu t'exaltes, ton geste est plus harmonieux.
    N'aimant que Toi, tu plains la femme qui s'encombre
    Du danger des amours faciles; toi, les yeux
    Pleins d'orgueil, tu ne sert qu'à ta beauté, dans l'ombre.






    VERS LIBRES


    Ils sont là, quelque part, les êtres de mon cœur,
                Dans de sombres demeures,
                Gardés par des esclaves ...
                Moi, je vais sans entraves,
                Et me navre de leurs peurs.


                J'abattrai les cloisons
                De leurs dures maisons,
                Les sauvant de leurs murs,
                Car c'est moi qui endure
                La vue de leurs prisons ...

              Et pendant que toi tu dors,
           C'est moi que l'on enferme--dehors!






    UN VIEUX CHAT DE MISÈRE


    Un vieux chat de misère
    Est entré dans ma serre,
    Chargé des éléments
    Electriques de l'orage--
    Ses yeux, charbons ardents,
    Brûlent au dedans
    De sa tête sans pelage--
    De sa vieille tête d'amant,
    Déchiquetée par la guerre,
    L amour et le carnage;
    Il manque d'aliments,
    Non d'ongles ni de dents!


    Enviez-les gens prudents,
    Soupirez, ô femmes sages!






    DISTIQUES


    Tu veux que je te fasse un amoureux poème.
    Ecoute donc plutôt si mon silence t'aime!

    Je ne saurais donner au sage alexandrin
    Les plaintes du plaisir, le rythme de nos reins!

    Quand, sous mon corps élu, je sens battre ta joie,
    Exprimer mon désir qui t'effleure et te broie?

    Sois ma maîtresse douce et folle; au lieu de mots
    Accepte sur ta chair d'extatiques sanglots!

    Et lorsque je retombe avec toi--si ma bouche,
    Eloquence muette, est celle qui te touche,

    Laisse moi parcourir ton être harmonieux
    De tes pieds recourbés à tes courbes cheveux.

    Nerfs d'accord, bien tendus: musique, sortilège,
    Harpe dont je détiens le secret des arpèges--

    Pour toi, l'art de mes mains, orgueilleux instrument,
    Fait l'amour en poète, et les vers en amant!






    EFFLUVE D'UN VIEUX LIVRE


    Effluve dun vieux livre,
    Humide odeur du temps--
    Console bien de vivre
    --De vivre trop longtemps--
    Dans ces pages respire
    Le passé des élans,
    Des voyages à lire
    Par ce vieux nouvel an!






    MES MORTS


    _Je suis ivre du vin des ténèbres, plus fort_
    _Que le vin des vivants: l'amour plante sa vigne_
    _Au-delà de la vie. Et mon cœur, enfin digne_
    _De son sang survivant, va revivre ses morts._


    A chaque projet de voyage
    Une blessure s'ouvre en moi.
    --J'ai bien trop aimé des visages
    Pendant des saisons et des mois!
    --Semblant choisir une personne
    --Aigu comme un chat Siamois--
    Mon désir fixe s'y cramponne
    De ses yeux clairs, phosphorescents.
    Et je te prend et je me donne,
    --Et tout redevient innocent:

    Deux fauves vivant leur idylle
    De cris, puis âme, vos accents!
    Et c'est l'amour qui fait la ville
    Déserte, et peuple le désert!
    --Allons à Tunis, à Séville,
    A Bagdad, au Pôle sud?--vers
    Ce jardin suspendu, miracle,
    Ce lit de fleurs sur l'univers.
    Seules ensemble, qu'on me bâcle
    Ces souvenirs, que libres, nus,
    Nous échappions aux débâcles....

    Quels sont ces êtres inconnus?
    Nous attendant après la houle ...
    Au nouveau monde survenu?
    Quels sont ces mendiants, ces foules?
    --Ah! tous nos morts sont avec nous!
    J'ai le vin triste: rien ne saoûle!

    Et seuls à seuls et à genoux,
    Mes morts sont venus me reprendre,
    --Où fuir leurs terribles yeux doux?
    Pas de Cythère, il faut descendre,
    --Il faut se quitter au retour?
    Chez moi, plus rien ne me demande,
    Assez de landes et de "moors",
    De villas et de cimetières--
    Pour t'enterrer vivant, amour?
    Et vous, mes ardentes poussières,
    Vous tous mes Morts, mes Sans-Soucis,
    Je vous reviens donc toute entière?

    Ces quais, ces platanes: Passy!
    Je vous reconduis à la porte
    Du cimetière que voici!
    Trop tard pour entrer mais qu'importe!
    --Ce haut navire attend Paris:
    Mon tout premier amour, ma morte....
    Pleurez encor, mes yeux taris!...






    L'AUBE


    L'aube.
    Le sifflement d'un train
    Déchirure ... Banlieue ... Aube.
    Quelqu'un qui n'est pas dans mon sommeil me touche l'épaule,
    --Quelqu'un qui n'est pas dans mon sommeil me dit: Lève-toi: viens

    Et mon coeur saute, hors de son élément, vers le soleil:
    Un instant mon cœur m'échappe--
    Puis mon corps reprend son fardeau d'angoisse:
    Ma chair enceinte de mon cœur bat:
    Et je redeviens le rythme et la chose de mon cœur.
    Mon cœur, dominé par sa prison, s'égalise,
    Reprend son cours, se fait au jour à vivre.
    --Jours à vivre: orchestration du bruit: tout se tait dans le bruit--
    Prêt à oublier ce saut hors de soi qui voulait renaître ...
    Ailleurs, l'aube passe!






    RÉVEILLON


    Puisqu aucun soir nouveau ne vient tourner la page,
    Je vis penchée encor sur la dernière image:
    Et reste en la turquoise enclose, à votre table,
    T'invitant, souvenir, à ces mets délectables
    Qui triomphent des vins, et fleuri de nos verres,
    Votre visage au bout d'un chemin de lumières!
    Moi, face à votre face entre les dix chandelles,
    Je vois briller pour moi les douces étincelles
    De vos yeux, de vos dents entre vos frêles joues,
    Et les doigts scintillants, et votre ombre qui joue
    D'un roseau ... fait jaillir parmi des pierreries
    L'art nocturne des sons en longues rêveries ...
    Et je reste attentive à la place où vous fûtes!...

    Plus tard, vers le silence autre des autres flûtes
    Qui furent consacrées jadis aux fumeries,
    --Nos pieds vêtus de soie et parmi vos soieries--
    Nous suivons la doctrine agréable et stoïque
    D'un sage qui remue une âme asiatique,
    Tandis que se dédouble, en route droite et fine,
    L'encens: souffle du dieu monté vers nos narines!






    BAL PARÉ


    Le trente Juin, vers les dix heures,
    Daignez étonner vos miroirs
    De travestis et de loups noirs,
    Et venir, laissant vos demeures,
    Jusqu'à mon petit pavillon.
    Nous y dessinerons des danses
    De jadis, et maintes cadenses
    Préférables au cotillon.
    La vie ayant sa parodie,
    On donnera la comédie,
    Ou bien des airs au clavecin
    Egrèneront leur mélodie.
    Mais tant me plaît que sans dessein
    Chaque heure amène sa plaisance,
    Que ce programme est incertain:
    Je veux surtout votre présence
    Du soir jusqu'au nouveau matin.
    Dans vos déguisements fantasques
    Vous me serez les bienvenus,
    Par vos sourires reconnus
    Sous l'uniformité des masques.






    FÊTES


    Les lanternes parmi les arbres ont des joues
    Peintes: telles mousmés lumineuses qu'on loue!
    La chasse aux vers luisants prendra pour son taïaut
    Les sons de quelque flûte invisible qui joue:
    Arabesques d'une âme ancestrale et mantchoue
    Qui s'enfle du désir d'arriver sans défaut
    A cette lune prise au pommier le plus haut?


            Un tourbillon de neige,
              Comme les lucioles
                Ont blanchi!
            .......................
            En ajoutant vos regards
           Aux regards de mes hôtes,
         Je croirai au retour des lucioles.

    Voici du maître Avril la frêle orfèvrerie:
    Hyacinthes, muguets, cloisons pleines de miel;
    La branche du pommier, fragilement fleurie,
    Semble être l'éphémère ouvrage d'Ariel.
    Je mets tout ce printemps sur ton grand lit: qu'il vienne
    Se rouler à tes pieds afin qu'il t'en souvienne.






    DIFFÉRENCES


    Vous vivez du temps qu'il fait,
    De projets et de voyages;
    De tel ennui, de tel fait,
    Dun besoin d'air, de visages
    Nouveaux, de rien et de tout.



    Je ne vis que de vous...



    De vous ... et sans voir les pages
    Des livres, de tout distrait,
    Ma barque est un lit défait,
    Vos traits sont mes paysages,
    L'air qu'il me faut sont vos doux



    Parfums: je vis de vous!






    JEUX SUPRÊMES


    Ce toit porte ta nudité,
    Ta forme: couleur ou bien vivre.
    Je bois le loin de ma bouche ivre
    De ta divine crudité.


    En pleine chair, en plein ciel suis-je,
    (Trébuchant vers quatre horizons
    Pour retomber en un frisson)
    Seule pour ce double vertige?


    Quitter, en tremblant des genoux,
    Ce baldaquin où la nuit sème
    Peu d'astres, descendre de même
    Vers Paris--éteint comme vous!






    VERS PRIS AUX POÈMES QUE JE N'ÉCRIRAI PAS


    Sentiments exprimés: libretti d'opéra.

    La saveur à venir des choses retrouvées...

            Ces lointaines vallées
            Qui fument de l'azur...

              Je fus heureux
            Avec ses seuls yeux
         --Et cet amour miraculeux
              Entre nous deux.

           Heureuses, bienheureuses,
           Les villes vaniteuses
           Se mirent dans ses eaux...

    Un homme, au chapeau dur, de la ville coupable,
    A travers la forêt a l'air d'un corbillard.

    L'humidité du sol clapote à mes semelles,

    Mars accourt, secouant ses écharpes de vent.

            De toute leur adolescence
            Ils se ruent contre la nuit.

    Le mois de mai, comme un poète anglais

    Le soleil est venu me chercher dans mon lit

            S'en aller n'importe où,
            Le bras autour d'un cou.

    Vers ces autres couleurs que contiennent nos ombres.

    Piano: harpe couchée en ton cercueil sonore.

    Harpe, eau mise en musique, cordes ... pluie...

    Quelque mort pourrissant au fond des marécages

    Et le crépuscule laisse tomber la lune....
    La lune, lanterne sourde aux mains de la nuit...

              Luisante aumône,
    Pièce d'argent que nous jette la nuit...

    La lune haut cernée de tout son devenir...

    Son profil blanc et froid: un fragment de la lune

    Et ses mains dans la nuit, fargilités lunaires.

    Les grands bouleaux aux yeux de Pharaonne,
    Noirs dans leur blanche peau.

            De ma verdure citadine.
            La branche verte se dandine
            A ma fenêtre--Un vers anglais
            Ignore le mal qu'il me fait.

    M'évanouir dans du brouillard

    La face d'un noyé flotte au ras des hublots.






    LE PREMIER DÉPART


           Ah! le silence, le multiple silence,
                 Vivant dans les départs,
       Et le pressentiment traversant comme un phare
                  L'ombre et la distance.
         Qu'elle semble loin, qu elle semble tard
                        L'absence.

    Dans un tourbillon d'heures--un jour, pas davantage--
                     Que de naufrages,
                   Que de débris épars,
                 Restés de ces naufrages!

                  Et cet embrun aux yeux,
                Et ces morts sur la plage,
       Et ces trésors sombrés au fond de la douleur
                La houle de vagues au cœur!






    AUCUNE CLEF N'A LE DESTIN


    Les bourgeois rentrent un par un
    Ou deux par deux: dans l'habitude
    De partager leurs solitudes
    --Des clefs ils ont la certitude!
    Aucune clef n'a le destin!
    je loge enfin près de ta rue;
    --Mais toi tu semble disparue.
    Ah! si tu m'étais accourue!
    Je veille, et c'est déjà demain!
    La route blanche sous la neige
    Tourne vers ton absence; fais-je
    Bien de rester seule, que sais-je?
    M'emmurer d'un «secret jardin»,
    Mourir des fleurs de lune mortes?
    La poigne de mes mains est forte.
    Garde aux spectres: j'ouvre la porte--
    Reprendre, vivante, tes mains!
    ... Le passé n'est un pur festin
    De flûtes et luths délectables,
    Que si l'amour inaltérable
    Se plait encor à notre table!






    ÉQUINOXE


              Ce soir, j'ai tout l'automne en moi,
    Ses gris, ses désespoirs, ses morts et ses tempêtes,
              Et tout le menaçant émoi
    Des malfaiteurs de route--oh fières et fortes têtes!
    Moi, le déshérité des humains, dont vous êtes,
              Volontaire déshérité,
    Que vous me faites mal avec votre gaîté!
              --Car j'ai quitté toutes vos fêtes.
    Prenez garde! je vous rendrai le mal que vous me faites.
    Je suis le Juif errant et le déshérité--
    Dieu de ma destinée, et souvent de la tienne,
              O femmes, trop diverses: «toi».
              Mais, la marque reste seule en moi.--
    Toi, par le mauvais temps, faut-il qu'il t'en souvienne
              --A peine?
    Voici venir l'automne, et l'on rentre chez soi:
    L'amour familial dans la maison jolie!
    Mais nous qui nous chauffons au feu de la folie,
    Où donc est notre épaule, où donc est notre toit?
    Amants des grands chemins, usons nos bons cerveaux,
              Nos bras qui ne savent qu'étreindre.
    --Etreindre? Mieux vaudrait étrangler--et sans geindre
    Se tuer dans l'égout pour l'amour vieux-nouveau,
    La face bien marquée de tous leurs crocs, (répliques
    Que nous auront données ces chiennes dites nos sœurs)
    Mais la face levée vers le ciel, extatiques,
              D'un dernier coup de poing, au cœur!






    NUIT BACHIQUE


    Ivre de boire à flots la belle nuit bachique,
    Je n'avais plus besoin que vous vous soyiez Vous:
    --Je n'avais plus besoin de la bonne musique!

    Je mâchais des débris d'étoiles--tels des fous
    Se reposant enfin d'être de trop eux-mêmes
    --Des dieux impersonnels courtisent mes genoux.

    Les ombres prenaient corps. Je leur disais "je t'aime"
    --Disant à tout: "je t'aime" est-ce à toi seule, à Toi
    Nuit dont je partageais les vastes diadèmes!

    J'étais libre un instant, universel et roi
    --Libre des sentiments qui font notre esclavage,
    Mais me voici repris par tout le désarroi ...

    Par le doute et le trouble et le double engrenage!
    Je ne suis plus que moi! Les choses d'alentour
    Ne sont plus qu'à leur place ... Et sûr d'un seul visage
    J'ai quitté tout amour pour retrouver l'Amour!






    L'ŒUVRE ÉTRANGE


    Mes mains, sculpteurs incompétents,
    Cherchent à faire leur statue:
    J'oppose une lutte têtue
    Au vide; mes gestes contents
    Tracent tes poses effacées,
    Et mon écho poursuit en vain
    Dans le silence--ce ravin--
    Les voix aux formes enlacées.

    Echappé de mes doigts palpant
    Ton corps--éclipse ou suicide?--
    Dans cet espace, où coïncident
    Des cubes d'air entre des pans
    De mur, limites plus opaques
    De contenir le transparent
    Où flottent vos contours errants,
    Sirène, aux stériles attaques?

    ... Faut-il que l'immatériel
    Nous ouvre à jamais tous ses gouffres
    De l'œuvre étrange dont je souffre
    Monte la race d'Ariel!






    SONNET D'AUTREFOIS.


    (Genre Anthologie!)


    Sans plus tâcher de plaire ou même d'émouvoir,
    Laisse-moi m'approcher de toi, plus virginale
    Que la neige; apprends-moi ta paix impartiale,
    Anéantis en moi la force et le vouloir.

    Je veux cacher mes yeux, plus tristes que le soir,
    A tes yeux, oublier jusqu'au petit ovale
    De ta face, et, mon front dans le frais intervalle
    De tes seins, sangloter des larmes sans espoir.

    Mes pleurs sont un poison très lent que je veux boire,
    Au lieu de mendier à quelque amour banal
    L'ingrate guérison, l'aveuglement final.

    Près de toi mon désir se consume, illusoire.
    O mes regrets! combien j'éprouve encor ce mal
    De rêver au bonheur auquel on ne peut croire.






    MÉDUSES


    Dans la forêt de mort, sans saisons, sans feuillages,
    --Où la sève des pins, de leurs troncs mutilés,
    Coule en lente agonie--il est un exilé
    De la vie, attendant de vains appareillages.

    Il regarde la vague apporter sur la plage
    Les masques transparents, aux traits annihilés,
    Des méduses.--Semblable aux ruines de Philæ,
    A ces visages d'eau s'oppose son visage.

    Masques faits et défaits du mouvement des flots,
    La mer toujours les roule à même ses sanglots,
    Des soleils de minuit jusqu'à l'aube des lunes.

    Les immolés ont tous la face de Jésus,
    Qui, des sables passifs, rejetés par le flux,
    Comptent le temps sans fin au sablier des dunes.






    ÉPILOGUE


    Amis, voici mon livre; et qu'il n'ait aucun vice
    Autre que celui-là dont nous sommes complices!
    Des amours décidés dans notre froid cerveau:
    Préparer sa folie et le geste qui vaut
    Est affaire de sport, non de veule nature;
    Car pour nous ressembler, créer notre aventure,
    Il nous faut déjouer tous les jeux du hasard,
    Congédier le sort, se choisir, non trop tard,
    Ses poisons, se disant: C'est moi qui m'exécute.
    --je ne serai jamais celui que persécute
    Autrui qui m'indiffère.--Et j'assiste, invité
    Curieux, mais distant, à l'Emotivité.
    Et l'on ne m'aimera que si je veux qu'on m'aime!
    ... Mais parfois je m'invente un plus proche moi-même.

    --Mécanisme du corps, viscères: peuple vil....
    Obéis à ce moi détourné de profil;
    Puisque la volonté m'incite à l'énergie,
    Je veux bien que ces vers portent mon effigie.






        TABLE


        Femme
        Tierce rime
        J'avais craint la neige
        Suffisance
        Vers libres
        Un vieux chat de misère
        Distiques
        Effluve d'un vieux livre
        Mes morts
        Aube
        Réveillon
        Bal paré
        Fêtes
        Différences
        Jeux suprêmes
        Vers pris aux poèmes que je n'écrirai pas
        Le premier départ
        Aucune clef n'a le destin
        Equinoxe
        Nuit bachique
        L'œuvre étrange
        Sonnet d'autrefois (genre anthologie)
        Méduses
        Epilogue







End of Project Gutenberg's Poems & Poèmes, by Natalie Clifford Barney

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS & POÈMES ***

***** This file should be named 49942-0.txt or 49942-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/9/4/49942/

Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at http://www.freeliterature.org
(Images generously made available by the Internet Archive.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

